Data Structures and Algorithms: Table of Contents




          Data Structures and Algorithms
          Alfred V. Aho, Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New
          Jersey
          John E. Hopcroft, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
          Jeffrey D. Ullman, Stanford University, Stanford,
          California

          PREFACE

          Chapter 1 Design and Analysis of Algorithms

          Chapter 2 Basic Data Types

          Chapter 3 Trees

          Chapter 4 Basic Operations on Sets

          Chapter 5 Advanced Set Representation Methods

          Chapter 6 Directed Graphs

          Chapter 7 Undirected Graphs

          Chapter 8 Sorting

          Chapter 9 Algorithm Analysis Techniques

          Chapter 10 Algorithm Design Techniques

          Chapter 11 Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage

          Chapter 12 Memory Management

          Bibliography




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/toc.htm [1.7.2001 18:57:37]
Preface




          Preface
          This book presents the data structures and algorithms that underpin much of today's
          computer programming. The basis of this book is the material contained in the first
          six chapters of our earlier work, The Design and Analysis of Computer Algorithms.
          We have expanded that coverage and have added material on algorithms for external
          storage and memory management. As a consequence, this book should be suitable as
          a text for a first course on data structures and algorithms. The only prerequisite we
          assume is familiarity with some high-level programming language such as Pascal.

             We have attempted to cover data structures and algorithms in the broader context
          of solving problems using computers. We use abstract data types informally in the
          description and implementation of algorithms. Although abstract data types are only
          starting to appear in widely available programming languages, we feel they are a
          useful tool in designing programs, no matter what the language.

             We also introduce the ideas of step counting and time complexity as an integral
          part of the problem solving process. This decision reflects our longheld belief that
          programmers are going to continue to tackle problems of progressively larger size as
          machines get faster, and that consequently the time complexity of algorithms will
          become of even greater importance, rather than of less importance, as new
          generations of hardware become available.


          The Presentation of Algorithms
          We have used the conventions of Pascal to describe our algorithms and data
          structures primarily because Pascal is so widely known. Initially we present several
          of our algorithms both abstractly and as Pascal programs, because we feel it is
          important to run the gamut of the problem solving process from problem formulation
          to a running program. The algorithms we present, however, can be readily
          implemented in any high-level programming language.


          Use of the Book
          Chapter 1 contains introductory remarks, including an explanation of our view of the
          problem-to-program process and the role of abstract data types in that process. Also
          appearing is an introduction to step counting and "big-oh" and "big-omega" notation.

             Chapter 2 introduces the traditional list, stack and queue structures, and the
          mapping, which is an abstract data type based on the mathematical notion of a



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/preface.htm (1 of 3) [1.7.2001 18:57:42]
Preface




          function. The third chapter introduces trees and the basic data structures that can be
          used to support various operations on trees efficiently.

              Chapters 4 and 5 introduce a number of important abstract data types that are
          based on the mathematical model of a set. Dictionaries and priority queues are
          covered in depth. Standard implementations for these concepts, including hash
          tables, binary search trees, partially ordered trees, tries, and 2-3 trees are covered,
          with the more advanced material clustered in Chapter 5.

              Chapters 6 and 7 cover graphs, with directed graphs in Chapter 6 and undirected
          graphs in 7. These chapters begin a section of the book devoted more to issues of
          algorithms than data structures, although we do discuss the basics of data structures
          suitable for representing graphs. A number of important graph algorithms are
          presented, including depth-first search, finding minimal spanning trees, shortest
          paths, and maximal matchings.

              Chapter 8 is devoted to the principal internal sorting algorithms: quicksort,
          heapsort, binsort, and the simpler, less efficient methods such as insertion sort. In
          this chapter we also cover the linear-time algorithms for finding medians and other
          order statistics.

              Chapter 9 discusses the asymptotic analysis of recursive procedures, including,
          of course, recurrence relations and techniques for solving them.

              Chapter 10 outlines the important techniques for designing algorithms, including
          divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, local search algorithms, and various
          forms of organized tree searching.

             The last two chapters are devoted to external storage organization and memory
          management. Chapter 11 covers external sorting and large-scale storage
          organization, including B-trees and index structures.

             Chapter 12 contains material on memory management, divided into four
          subareas, depending on whether allocations involve fixed or varying sized blocks,
          and whether the freeing of blocks takes place by explicit program action or implicitly
          when garbage collection occurs.

              Material from this book has been used by the authors in data structures and
          algorithms courses at Columbia, Cornell, and Stanford, at both undergraduate and
          graduate levels. For example, a preliminary version of this book was used at Stanford
          in a 10-week course on data structures, taught to a population consisting primarily of
          Juniors through first-year graduate students. The coverage was limited to Chapters 1-



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/preface.htm (2 of 3) [1.7.2001 18:57:42]
Preface




          4, 9, 10, and 12, with parts of 5-7.


          Exercises
          A number of exercises of varying degrees of difficulty are found at the end of each
          chapter. Many of these are fairly straightforward tests of the mastery of the material
          of the chapter. Some exercises require more thought, and these have been singly
          starred. Doubly starred exercises are harder still, and are suitable for more advanced
          courses. The bibliographic notes at the end of each chapter provide references for
          additional reading.


          Acknowledgments
          We wish to acknowledge Bell Laboratories for the use of its excellent UNIX™-
          based text preparation and data communication facilities that significantly eased the
          preparation of a manuscript by geographically separated authors. Many of our
          colleagues have read various portions of the manuscript and have given us valuable
          comments and advice. In particular, we would like to thank Ed Beckham, Jon
          Bentley, Kenneth Chu, Janet Coursey, Hank Cox, Neil Immerman, Brian Kernighan,
          Steve Mahaney, Craig McMurray, Alberto Mendelzon, Alistair Moffat, Jeff
          Naughton, Kerry Nemovicher, Paul Niamkey, Yoshio Ohno, Rob Pike, Chris Rouen,
          Maurice Schlumberger, Stanley Selkow, Chengya Shih, Bob Tarjan, W. Van Snyder,
          Peter Weinberger, and Anthony Yeracaris for helpful suggestions. Finally, we would
          like to give our warmest thanks to Mrs. Claire Metzger for her expert assistance in
          helping prepare the manuscript for typesetting.

                                                                                                                       A.V.A.
                                                                                                                        J.E.H.
                                                                                                                       J.D.U.

                                            Table of Contents            Go to Chapter 1




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/preface.htm (3 of 3) [1.7.2001 18:57:42]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         Design and Analysis of Algorithms
         There are many steps involved in writing a computer program to solve a given problem.
         The steps go from problem formulation and specification, to design of the solution, to
         implementation, testing and documentation, and finally to evaluation of the solution. This
         chapter outlines our approach to these steps. Subsequent chapters discuss the algorithms
         and data structures that are the building blocks of most computer programs.


         1.1 From Problems to Programs
         Half the battle is knowing what problem to solve. When initially approached, most
         problems have no simple, precise specification. In fact, certain problems, such as creating a
         "gourmet" recipe or preserving world peace, may be impossible to formulate in terms that
         admit of a computer solution. Even if we suspect our problem can be solved on a computer,
         there is usually considerable latitude in several problem parameters. Often it is only by
         experimentation that reasonable values for these parameters can be found.

            If certain aspects of a problem can be expressed in terms of a formal model, it is usually
         beneficial to do so, for once a problem is formalized, we can look for solutions in terms of
         a precise model and determine whether a program already exists to solve that problem.
         Even if there is no existing program, at least we can discover what is known about this
         model and use the properties of the model to help construct a good solution.

             Almost any branch of mathematics or science can be called into service to help model
         some problem domain. Problems essentially numerical in nature can be modeled by such
         common mathematical concepts as simultaneous linear equations (e.g., finding currents in
         electrical circuits, or finding stresses in frames made of connected beams) or differential
         equations (e.g., predicting population growth or the rate at which chemicals will react).
         Symbol and text processing problems can be modeled by character strings and formal
         grammars. Problems of this nature include compilation (the translation of programs written
         in a programming language into machine language) and information retrieval tasks such as
         recognizing particular words in lists of titles owned by a library.


         Algorithms
         Once we have a suitable mathematical model for our problem, we can attempt to find a
         solution in terms of that model. Our initial goal is to find a solution in the form of an
         algorithm, which is a finite sequence of instructions, each of which has a clear meaning and
         can be performed with a finite amount of effort in a finite length of time. An integer
         assignment statement such as x := y + z is an example of an instruction that can be executed


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (1 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         in a finite amount of effort. In an algorithm instructions can be executed any number of
         times, provided the instructions themselves indicate the repetition. However, we require
         that, no matter what the input values may be, an algorithm terminate after executing a finite
         number of instructions. Thus, a program is an algorithm as long as it never enters an
         infinite loop on any input.

             There is one aspect of this definition of an algorithm that needs some clarification. We
         said each instruction of an algorithm must have a "clear meaning" and must be executable
         with a "finite amount of effort." Now what is clear to one person may not be clear to
         another, and it is often difficult to prove rigorously that an instruction can be carried out in
         a finite amount of time. It is often difficult as well to prove that on any input, a sequence of
         instructions terminates, even if we understand clearly what each instruction means. By
         argument and counterargument, however, agreement can usually be reached as to whether a
         sequence of instructions constitutes an algorithm. The burden of proof lies with the person
         claiming to have an algorithm. In Section 1.5 we discuss how to estimate the running time
         of common programming language constructs that can be shown to require a finite amount
         of time for their execution.

            In addition to using Pascal programs as algorithms, we shall often present algorithms
         using a pseudo-language that is a combination of the constructs of a programming language
         together with informal English statements. We shall use Pascal as the programming
         language, but almost any common programming language could be used in place of Pascal
         for the algorithms we shall discuss. The following example illustrates many of the steps in
         our approach to writing a computer program.

         Example 1.1. A mathematical model can be used to help design a traffic light for a
         complicated intersection of roads. To construct the pattern of lights, we shall create a
         program that takes as input a set of permitted turns at an intersection (continuing straight on
         a road is a "turn") and partitions this set into as few groups as possible such that all turns in
         a group are simultaneously permissible without collisions. We shall then associate a phase
         of the traffic light with each group in the partition. By finding a partition with the smallest
         number of groups, we can construct a traffic light with the smallest number of phases.

             For example, the intersection shown in Fig. 1.1 occurs by a watering hole called JoJo's
         near Princeton University, and it has been known to cause some navigational difficulty,
         especially on the return trip. Roads C and E are oneway, the others two way. There are 13
         turns one might make at this intersection. Some pairs of turns, like AB (from A to B) and
         EC, can be carried out simultaneously, while others, like AD and EB, cause lines of traffic
         to cross and therefore cannot be carried out simultaneously. The light at the intersection
         must permit turns in such an order that AD and EB are never permitted at the same time,
         while the light might permit AB and EC to be made simultaneously.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (2 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                                                      Fig. 1.1. An intersection.

            We can model this problem with a mathematical structure known as a graph. A graph
         consists of a set of points called vertices, and lines connecting the points, called edges. For
         the traffic intersection problem we can draw a graph whose vertices represent turns and
         whose edges connect pairs of vertices whose turns cannot be performed simultaneously.
         For the intersection of Fig. 1.1, this graph is shown in Fig. 1.2, and in Fig. 1.3 we see
         another representation of this graph as a table with a 1 in row i and column j whenever
         there is an edge between vertices i and j.

             The graph can aid us in solving the traffic light design problem. A coloring of a graph is
         an assignment of a color to each vertex of the graph so that no two vertices connected by an
         edge have the same color. It is not hard to see that our problem is one of coloring the graph
         of incompatible turns using as few colors as possible.

             The problem of coloring graphs has been studied for many decades, and the theory of
         algorithms tells us a lot about this problem. Unfortunately, coloring an arbitrary graph with
         as few colors as possible is one of a large class of problems called "NP-complete
         problems," for which all known solutions are essentially of the type "try all possibilities."
         In the case of the coloring problem, "try all possibilities" means to try all assignments of
         colors to vertices using at first one color, then two colors, then three, and so on, until a legal
         coloring is found. With care, we can be a little speedier than this, but it is generally
         believed that no algorithm to solve this problem can be substantially more efficient than
         this most obvious approach.

            We are now confronted with the possibility that finding an optimal solution for the
         problem at hand is computationally very expensive. We can adopt




                                         Fig. 1.2. Graph showing incompatible turns.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (3 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                                             Fig. 1.3. Table of incompatible turns.

         one of three approaches. If the graph is small, we might attempt to find an optimal solution
         exhaustively, trying all possibilities. This approach, however, becomes prohibitively
         expensive for large graphs, no matter how efficient we try to make the program. A second
         approach would be to look for additional information about the problem at hand. It may
         turn out that the graph has some special properties, which make it unnecessary to try all
         possibilities in finding an optimal solution. The third approach is to change the problem a
         little and look for a good but not necessarily optimal solution. We might be happy with a
         solution that gets close to the minimum number of colors on small graphs, and works
         quickly, since most intersections are not even as complex as Fig. 1.1. An algorithm that
         quickly produces good but not necessarily optimal solutions is called a heuristic.

            One reasonable heuristic for graph coloring is the following "greedy" algorithm. Initially
         we try to color as many vertices as possible with the first color, then as many as possible of
         the uncolored vertices with the second color, and so on. To color vertices with a new color,
         we perform the following steps.

              1. Select some uncolored vertex and color it with the new color.

              2. Scan the list of uncolored vertices. For each uncolored vertex, determine whether it
                 has an edge to any vertex already colored with the new color. If there is no such
                 edge, color the present vertex with the new color.

            This approach is called "greedy" because it colors a vertex whenever it can, without
         considering the potential drawbacks inherent in making such a move. There are situations
         where we could color more vertices with one color if we were less "greedy" and skipped
         some vertex we could legally color. For example, consider the graph of Fig. 1.4, where
         having colored vertex 1 red, we can color vertices 3 and 4 red also, provided we do not
         color 2 first. The greedy algorithm would tell us to color 1 and 2 red, assuming we
         considered vertices in numerical order.




                                                           Fig. 1.4. A graph.

            As an example of the greedy approach applied to Fig. 1.2, suppose we start by coloring
         AB blue. We can color AC, AD, and BA blue, because none of these four vertices has an
         edge in common. We cannot color BC blue because there is an edge between AB and BC.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (4 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         Similarly, we cannot color BD, DA, or DB blue because each of these vertices is connected
         by an edge to one or more vertices already colored blue. However, we can color DC blue.
         Then EA, EB, and EC cannot be colored blue, but ED can.

            Now we start a second color, say by coloring BC red. BD can be colored red, but DA
         cannot, because of the edge between BD and DA. Similarly, DB cannot be colored red, and
         DC is already blue, but EA can be colored red. Each other uncolored vertex has an edge to a
         red vertex, so no other vertex can be colored red.

            The remaining uncolored vertices are DA, DB, EB, and EC. If we color DA green, then
         DB can be colored green, but EB and EC cannot. These two may be colored with a fourth
         color, say yellow. The colors are summarized in Fig. 1.5. The "extra" turns are determined
         by the greedy approach to be compatible with the turns already given that color, as well as
         with each other. When the traffic light allows turns of one color, it can also allow the extra
         turns safely.




                                         Fig. 1.5. A coloring of the graph of Fig. 1.2.

            The greedy approach does not always use the minimum possible number of colors. We
         can use the theory of algorithms again to evaluate the goodness of the solution produced. In
         graph theory, a k-clique is a set of k vertices, every pair of which is connected by an edge.
         Obviously, k colors are needed to color a k-clique, since no two vertices in a clique may be
         given the same color.

            In the graph of Fig. 1.2 the set of four vertices AC, DA, BD, EB is a 4-clique. Therefore,
         no coloring with three or fewer colors exists, and the solution of Fig. 1.5 is optimal in the
         sense that it uses the fewest colors possible. In terms of our original problem, no traffic
         light for the intersection of Fig. 1.1 can have fewer than four phases.

            Therefore, consider a traffic light controller based on Fig. 1.5, where each phase of the
         controller corresponds to a color. At each phase the turns indicated by the row of the table
         corresponding to that color are permitted, and the other turns are forbidden. This pattern
         uses as few phases as possible.


         Pseudo-Language and Stepwise Refinement
         Once we have an appropriate mathematical model for a problem, we can formulate an
         algorithm in terms of that model. The initial versions of the algorithm are often couched in
         general statements that will have to be refined subsequently into smaller, more definite
         instructions. For example, we described the greedy graph coloring algorithm in terms such
         as "select some uncolored vertex." These instructions are, we hope, sufficiently clear that



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (5 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         the reader grasps our intent. To convert such an informal algorithm to a program, however,
         we must go through several stages of formalization (called stepwise refinement) until we
         arrive at a program the meaning of whose steps are formally defined by a language manual.

         Example 1.2. Let us take the greedy algorithm for graph coloring part of the way towards a
         Pascal program. In what follows, we assume there is a graph G, some of whose vertices
         may be colored. The following program greedy determines a set of vertices called newclr,
         all of which can be colored with a new color. The program is called repeatedly, until all
         vertices are colored. At a coarse level, we might specify greedy in pseudo-language as in
         Fig. 1.6.


           procedure greedy ( var G: GRAPH; var newclr: SET );
             { greedy assigns to newclr a set of vertices of G that may be
                 given the same color }
              begin
         (1)      newclr := Ø; †
         (2)      for each uncolored vertex v of G do
         (3)         if v is not adjacent to any vertex in newclr then begin
         (4)             mark v colored;
         (5)             add v to newclr
                 end
              end; { greedy }

                                        Fig. 1.6. First refinement of greedy algorithm.

            We notice from Fig. 1.6 certain salient features of our pseudo-language. First, we use
         boldface lower case keywords corresponding to Pascal reserved words, with the same
         meaning as in standard Pascal. Upper case types such as GRAPH and SET‡ are the names
         of "abstract data types." They will be defined by Pascal type definitions and the operations
         associated with these abstract data types will be defined by Pascal procedures when we
         create the final program. We shall discuss abstract data types in more detail in the next two
         sections.

            The flow-of-control constructs of Pascal, like if, for, and while, are available for pseudo-
         language statements, but conditionals, as in line (3), may be informal statements rather than
         Pascal conditional expressions. Note that the assignment at line (1) uses an informal
         expression on the right. Also, the for-loop at line (2) iterates over a set.

            To be executed, the pseudo-language program of Fig. 1.6 must be refined into a
         conventional Pascal program. We shall not proceed all the way to such a program in this
         example, but let us give one example of refinement, transforming the if-statement in line
         (3) of Fig. 1.6 into more conventional code.

             To test whether vertex v is adjacent to some vertex in newclr, we consider each member



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (6 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         w of newclr and examine the graph G to see whether there is an edge between v and w. An
         organized way to make this test is to use found, a boolean variable to indicate whether an
         edge has been found. We can replace lines (3)-(5) of Fig. 1.6 by the code in Fig. 1.7.


               procedure greedy ( var G: GRAPH; var newclr: SET );
                 begin
         (1)        newclr : = Ø;
         (2)        for each uncolored vertex v of G do begin
         (3.1)          found := false;
         (3.2)          for each vertex w in newclr do
         (3.3)             if there is an edge between v and w in G then
         (3.4)                 found := true;
         (3.5)          if found = false then begin
                          { v is adjacent to no vertex in newclr }
         (4)               mark v colored;
         (5)               add v to newclr
                      end
                   end
                 end; { greedy }

                                            Fig. 1.7. Refinement of part of Fig. 1.6.

            We have now reduced our algorithm to a collection of operations on two sets of vertices.
         The outer loop, lines (2)-(5), iterates over the set of uncolored vertices of G. The inner
         loop, lines (3.2)-(3.4), iterates over the vertices currently in the set newclr. Line (5) adds
         newly colored vertices to newclr.

            There are a variety of ways to represent sets in a programming language like Pascal. In
         Chapters 4 and 5 we shall study several such representations. In this example we can
         simply represent each set of vertices by another abstract data type LIST, which here can be
         implemented by a list of integers terminated by a special value null (for which we might
         use the value 0). These integers might, for example, be stored in an array, but there are
         many other ways to represent LIST's, as we shall see in Chapter 2.

             We can now replace the for-statement of line (3.2) in Fig. 1.7 by a loop, where w is
         initialized to be the first member of newclr and changed to be the next member, each time
         around the loop. We can also perform the same refinement for the for-loop of line (2) in
         Fig. 1.6. The revised procedure greedy is shown in Fig. 1.8. There is still more refinement
         to be done after Fig. 1.8, but we shall stop here to take stock of what we have done.


                procedure greedy ( var G: GRAPH; var newclr: LIST );
                 { greedy assigns to newclr those vertices that may be
                    given the same color }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (7 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                  var
                     found: boolean;
                     v, w: integer;
                  begin
                     newclr := Ø;
                     v := first uncolored vertex in G;
                     while v < > null do begin
                       found := false;
                       w := first vertex in newclr;
                       while w < > null do begin
                           if there is an edge between v and w in G then
                              found := true;
                           w := next vertex in newclr
                       end;
                       if found = false do begin
                           mark v colored;
                           add v to newclr
                       end;
                       v := next uncolored vertex in G
                     end
                  end; { greedy }

                                               Fig. 1.8. Refined greedy procedure.


         Summary
         In Fig. 1.9 we see the programming process as it will be treated in this book. The first stage
         is modeling using an appropriate mathematical model such as a graph. At this stage, the
         solution to the problem is an algorithm expressed very informally.

            At the next stage, the algorithm is written in pseudo-language, that is, a mixture of
         Pascal constructs and less formal English statements. To reach that stage, the informal
         English is replaced by progressively more detailed sequences of statements, in the process
         known as stepwise refinement. At some point the pseudo-language program is sufficiently
         detailed that the




                                             Fig. 1.9. The problem solving process.

         operations to be performed on the various types of data become fixed. We then create
         abstract data types for each type of data (except for the elementary types such as integers,
         reals and character strings) by giving a procedure name for each operation and replacing



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (8 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         uses of each operation by an invocation of the corresponding procedure.

             In the third stage we choose an implementation for each abstract data type and write the
         procedures for the various operations on that type. We also replace any remaining informal
         statements in the pseudo-language algorithm by Pascal code. The result is a running
         program. After debugging it will be a working program, and we hope that by using the
         stepwise development approach outlined in Fig. 1.9, little debugging will be necessary.


         1.2 Abstract Data Types
         Most of the concepts introduced in the previous section should be familiar ideas from a
         beginning course in programming. The one possibly new notion is that of an abstract data
         type, and before proceeding it would be useful to discuss the role of abstract data types in
         the overall program design process. To begin, it is useful to compare an abstract data type
         with the more familiar notion of a procedure.

            Procedures, an essential tool in programming, generalize the notion of an operator.
         Instead of being limited to the built-in operators of a programming language (addition,
         subtraction, etc.), by using procedures a programmer is free to define his own operators and
         apply them to operands that need not be basic types. An example of a procedure used in
         this way is a matrix multiplication routine.

            Another advantage of procedures is that they can be used to encapsulate parts of an
         algorithm by localizing in one section of a program all the statements relevant to a certain
         aspect of a program. An example of encapsulation is the use of one procedure to read all
         input and to check for its validity. The advantage of encapsulation is that we know where to
         go to make changes to the encapsulated aspect of the problem. For example, if we decide to
         check that inputs are nonnegative, we need to change only a few lines of code, and we
         know just where those lines are.


         Definition of Abstract Data Type
         We can think of an abstract data type (ADT) as a mathematical model with a collection of
         operations defined on that model. Sets of integers, together with the operations of union,
         intersection, and set difference, form a simple example of an ADT. In an ADT, the
         operations can take as operands not only instances of the ADT being defined but other
         types of operands, e.g., integers or instances of another ADT, and the result of an operation
         can be other than an instance of that ADT. However, we assume that at least one operand,
         or the result, of any operation is of the ADT in question.

             The two properties of procedures mentioned above -- generalization and encapsulation --
         apply equally well to abstract data types. ADT's are generalizations of primitive data types
         (integer, real, and so on), just as procedures are generalizations of primitive operations (+, -



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (9 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         , and so on). The ADT encapsulates a data type in the sense that the definition of the type
         and all operations on that type can be localized to one section of the program. If we wish to
         change the implementation of an ADT, we know where to look, and by revising one small
         section we can be sure that there is no subtlety elsewhere in the program that will cause
         errors concerning this data type. Moreover, outside the section in which the ADT's
         operations are defined, we can treat the ADT as a primitive type; we have no concern with
         the underlying implementation. One pitfall is that certain operations may involve more than
         one ADT, and references to these operations must appear in the sections for both ADT's.

            To illustrate the basic ideas, consider the procedure greedy of the previous section
         which, in Fig. 1.8, was implemented using primitive operations on an abstract data type
         LIST (of integers). The operations performed on the LIST newclr were:

              1. make a list empty,

              2. get the first member of the list and return null if the list is empty,

              3. get the next member of the list and return null if there is no next member, and

              4. insert an integer into the list.

            There are many data structures that can be used to implement such lists efficiently, and
         we shall consider the subject in depth in Chapter 2. In Fig. 1.8, if we replace these
         operations by the statements

              1. MAKENULL(newclr);

              2. w := FIRST(newclr);

              3. w := NEXT(newclr);

              4. INSERT(v, newclr);

         then we see an important aspect of abstract data types. We can implement a type any way
         we like, and the programs, such as Fig. 1.8, that use objects of that type do not change; only
         the procedures implementing the operations on the type need to change.

             Turning to the abstract data type GRAPH we see need for the following operations:

              1. get the first uncolored vertex,

              2. test whether there is an edge between two vertices,

              3. mark a vertex colored, and

              4. get the next uncolored vertex.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (10 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         There are clearly other operations needed outside the procedure greedy, such as inserting
         vertices and edges into the graph and making all vertices uncolored. There are many data
         structures that can be used to support graphs with these operations, and we shall study the
         subject of graphs in Chapters 6 and 7.

            It should be emphasized that there is no limit to the number of operations that can be
         applied to instances of a given mathematical model. Each set of operations defines a
         distinct ADT. Some examples of operations that might be defined on an abstract data type
         SET are:

              1. MAKENULL(A). This procedure makes the null set be the value for set A.

              2. UNION(A, B, C). This procedure takes two set-valued arguments A and B, and
                 assigns the union of A and B to be the value of set C.

              3. SIZE(A). This function takes a set-valued argument A and returns an object of type
                 integer whose value is the number of elements in the set A.

            An implementation of an ADT is a translation, into statements of a programming
         language, of the declaration that defines a variable to be of that abstract data type, plus a
         procedure in that language for each operation of the ADT. An implementation chooses a
         data structure to represent the ADT; each data structure is built up from the basic data
         types of the underlying programming language using the available data structuring
         facilities. Arrays and record structures are two important data structuring facilities that are
         available in Pascal. For example, one possible implementation for variable S of type SET
         would be an array that contained the members of S.

            One important reason for defining two ADT's to be different if they have the same
         underlying model but different operations is that the appropriateness of an implementation
         depends very much on the operations to be performed. Much of this book is devoted to
         examining some basic mathematical models such as sets and graphs, and developing the
         preferred implementations for various collections of operations.

            Ideally, we would like to write our programs in languages whose primitive data types
         and operations are much closer to the models and operations of our ADT's. In many ways
         Pascal is not well suited to the implementation of various common ADT's but none of the
         programming languages in which ADT's can be declared more directly is as well known.
         See the bibliographic notes for information about some of these languages.


         1.3 Data Types, Data Structures and Abstract
         Data Types
         Although the terms "data type" (or just "type"), "data structure" and "abstract data type"



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (11 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         sound alike, they have different meanings. In a programming language, the data type of a
         variable is the set of values that the variable may assume. For example, a variable of type
         boolean can assume either the value true or the value false, but no other value. The basic
         data types vary from language to language; in Pascal they are integer, real, boolean, and
         character. The rules for constructing composite data types out of basic ones also vary from
         language to language; we shall mention how Pascal builds such types momentarily.

            An abstract data type is a mathematical model, together with various operations defined
         on the model. As we have indicated, we shall design algorithms in terms of ADT's, but to
         implement an algorithm in a given programming language we must find some way of
         representing the ADT's in terms of the data types and operators supported by the
         programming language itself. To represent the mathematical model underlying an ADT we
         use data structures, which are collections of variables, possibly of several different data
         types, connected in various ways.

             The cell is the basic building block of data structures. We can picture a cell as a box that
         is capable of holding a value drawn from some basic or composite data type. Data
         structures are created by giving names to aggregates of cells and (optionally) interpreting
         the values of some cells as representing connections (e.g., pointers) among cells.

             The simplest aggregating mechanism in Pascal and most other programming languages
         is the (one-dimensional) array, which is a sequence of cells of a given type, which we shall
         often refer to as the celltype. We can think of an array as a mapping from an index set (such
         as the integers 1, 2, . . . , n) into the celltype. A cell within an array can be referenced by
         giving the array name together with a value from the index set of the array. In Pascal the
         index set may be an enumerated type, such as (north, east, south, west), or a subrange type,
         such as 1..10. The values in the cells of an array can be of any one type. Thus, the
         declaration

                     name: array[indextype] of celltype;

         declares name to be a sequence of cells, one for each value of type indextype; the contents
         of the cells can be any member of type celltype.

             Incidentally, Pascal is somewhat unusual in its richness of index types. Many languages
         allow only subrange types (finite sets of consecutive integers) as index types. For example,
         to index an array by letters in Fortran, one must simulate the effect by using integer indices,
         such as by using index 1 to stand for 'A', 2 to stand for 'B', and so on.

             Another common mechanism for grouping cells in programming languages is the record
         structure. A record is a cell that is made up of a collection of cells, called fields, of possibly
         dissimilar types. Records are often grouped into arrays; the type defined by the aggregation
         of the fields of a record becomes the "celltype" of the array. For example, the Pascal
         declaration




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (12 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                     var
                        reclist: array[l..4] of record
                           data: real;
                           next: integer
                        end

         declares reclist to be a four-element array, whose cells are records with two fields, data and
         next.

             A third grouping method found in Pascal and some other languages is the file. The file,
         like the one-dimensional array, is a sequence of values of some particular type. However, a
         file has no index type; elements can be accessed only in the order of their appearance in the
         file. In contrast, both the array and the record are "random-access" structures, meaning that
         the time needed to access a component of an array or record is independent of the value of
         the array index or field selector. The compensating benefit of grouping by file, rather than
         by array, is that the number of elements in a file can be time-varying and unlimited.


         Pointers and Cursors
         In addition to the cell-grouping features of a programming language, we can represent
         relationships between cells using pointers and cursors. A pointer is a cell whose value
         indicates another cell. When we draw pictures of data structures, we indicate the fact that
         cell A is a pointer to cell B by drawing an arrow from A to B.

            In Pascal, we can create a pointer variable ptr that will point to cells of a given type, say
         celltype, by the declaration

                     var
                        ptr: ↑ celltype

         A postfix up-arrow is used in Pascal as the dereferencing operator, so the expression ptr↑
         denotes the value (of type celltype) in the cell pointed to by ptr.

            A cursor is an integer-valued cell, used as a pointer to an array. As a method of
         connection, the cursor is essentially the same as a pointer, but a cursor can be used in
         languages like Fortran that do not have explicit pointer types as Pascal does. By treating a
         cell of type integer as an index value for some array, we effectively make that cell point to
         one cell of the array. This technique, unfortunately, works only when cells of arrays are
         pointed to; there is no reasonable way to interpret an integer as a "pointer" to a cell that is
         not part of an array.

            We shall draw an arrow from a cursor cell to the cell it "points to." Sometimes, we shall
         also show the integer in the cursor cell, to remind us that it is not a true pointer. The reader
         should observe that the Pascal pointer mechanism is such that cells in arrays can only be



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (13 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         "pointed to" by cursors, never by true pointers. Other languages, like PL/I or C, allow
         components of arrays to be pointed to by either cursors or true pointers, while in Fortran or
         Algol, there being no pointer type, only cursors can be used.

         Example 1.3. In Fig. 1.10 we see a two-part data structure that consists of a chain of cells
         containing cursors to the array reclist defined above. The purpose of the field next in reclist
         is to point to another record in the array. For example, reclist[4].next is 1, so record 4 is
         followed by record 1. Assuming record 4 is first, the next field of reclist orders the records
         4, 1, 3, 2. Note that the next field is 0 in record 2, indicating that there is no following
         record. It is a useful convention, one we shall adopt in this book, to use 0 as a "NIL
         pointer," when cursors are being used. This idea is sound only if we also make the
         convention that arrays to which cursors "point" must be indexed starting at 1, never at 0.




                                             Fig. 1.10. Example of a data structure.

             The cells in the chain of records in Fig. 1.10 are of the type

                     type
                        recordtype = record
                              cursor: integer;
                              ptr: ↑ recordtype
                        end

         The chain is pointed to by a variable named header, which is of type ↑ record-type; header
         points to an anonymous record of type recordtype.† That record has a value 4 in its cursor
         field; we regard this 4 as an index into the array reclist. The record has a true pointer in
         field ptr to another anonymous record. The record pointed to has an index in its cursor field
         indicating position 2 of reclist; it also has a nil pointer in its ptr field.


         1.4 The Running Time of a Program
         When solving a problem we are faced frequently with a choice among algorithms. On what
         basis should we choose? There are two often contradictory goals.

              1. We would like an algorithm that is easy to understand, code, and debug.

              2. We would like an algorithm that makes efficient use of the computer's resources,
                 especially, one that runs as fast as possible.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (14 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




            When we are writing a program to be used once or a few times, goal (1) is most
         important. The cost of the programmer's time will most likely exceed by far the cost of
         running the program, so the cost to optimize is the cost of writing the program. When
         presented with a problem whose solution is to be used many times, the cost of running the
         program may far exceed the cost of writing it, especially, if many of the program runs are
         given large amounts of input. Then it is financially sound to implement a fairly complicated
         algorithm, provided that the resulting program will run significantly faster than a more
         obvious program. Even in these situations it may be wise first to implement a simple
         algorithm, to determine the actual benefit to be had by writing a more complicated
         program. In building a complex system it is often desirable to implement a simple
         prototype on which measurements and simulations can be performed, before committing
         oneself to the final design. It follows that programmers must not only be aware of ways of
         making programs run fast, but must know when to apply these techniques and when not to
         bother.


         Measuring the Running Time of a Program
         The running time of a program depends on factors such as:

              1. the input to the program,

              2. the quality of code generated by the compiler used to create the object program,

              3. the nature and speed of the instructions on the machine used to execute the program,
                 and

              4. the time complexity of the algorithm underlying the program.

             The fact that running time depends on the input tells us that the running time of a
         program should be defined as a function of the input. Often, the running time depends not
         on the exact input but only on the "size" of the input. A good example is the process known
         as sorting, which we shall discuss in Chapter 8. In a sorting problem, we are given as input
         a list of items to be sorted, and we are to produce as output the same items, but smallest (or
         largest) first. For example, given 2, 1, 3, 1, 5, 8 as input we might wish to produce 1, 1, 2,
         3, 5, 8 as output. The latter list is said to be sorted smallest first. The natural size measure
         for inputs to a sorting program is the number of items to be sorted, or in other words, the
         length of the input list. In general, the length of the input is an appropriate size measure,
         and we shall assume that measure of size unless we specifically state otherwise.

            It is customary, then, to talk of T(n), the running time of a program on inputs of size n.
         For example, some program may have a running time T(n) = cn2, where c is a constant. The
         units of T(n) will be left unspecified, but we can think of T(n) as being the number of
         instructions executed on an idealized computer.

             For many programs, the running time is really a function of the particular input, and not



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (15 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         just of the input size. In that case we define T(n) to be the worst case running time, that is,
         the maximum, over all inputs of size n, of the running time on that input. We also consider
         Tavg(n), the average, over all inputs of size n, of the running time on that input. While
         Tavg(n) appears a fairer measure, it is often fallacious to assume that all inputs are equally
         likely. In practice, the average running time is often much harder to determine than the
         worst-case running time, both because the analysis becomes mathematically intractable and
         because the notion of "average" input frequently has no obvious meaning. Thus, we shall
         use worst-case running time as the principal measure of time complexity, although we shall
         mention average-case complexity wherever we can do so meaningfully.

            Now let us consider remarks (2) and (3) above: that the running time of a program
         depends on the compiler used to compile the program and the machine used to execute it.
         These facts imply that we cannot express the running time T(n) in standard time units such
         as seconds. Rather, we can only make remarks like "the running time of such-and-such an
         algorithm is proportional to n2." The constant of proportionality will remain unspecified
         since it depends so heavily on the compiler, the machine, and other factors.


         Big-Oh and Big-Omega Notation
         To talk about growth rates of functions we use what is known as "big-oh" notation. For
         example, when we say the running time T(n) of some program is O(n2), read "big oh of n
         squared" or just "oh of n squared," we mean that there are positive constants c and n0 such
         that for n equal to or greater than n0, we have T(n) ≤ cn2.

         Example 1.4. Suppose T(0) = 1, T(1) = 4, and in general T(n) = (n+l)2. Then we see that
         T(n) is O(n2), as we may let n0 = 1 and c = 4. That is, for n ≥ 1, we have (n + 1)2 ≤ 4n2, as
         the reader may prove easily. Note that we cannot let n0 = 0, because T(0) = 1 is not less
         than c02 = 0 for any constant c.

            In what follows, we assume all running-time functions are defined on the nonnegative
         integers, and their values are always nonnegative, although not necessarily integers. We say
         that T(n) is O(f(n)) if there are constants c and n0 such that T(n) ≤ cf(n) whenever n ≥ n0. A
         program whose running time is O(f (n)) is said to have growth rate f(n).

         Example 1.5. The function T(n)= 3n3 + 2n2 is O(n3). To see this, let n0 = 0 and c = 5.
         Then, the reader may show that for n ≥ 0, 3n3 + 2n2 ≤ 5n3. We could also say that this T(n)
         is O(n4), but this would be a weaker statement than saying it is O(n3).

           As another example, let us prove that the function 3n is not O (2n). Suppose that there
         were constants n0 and c such that for all n ≥ n0, we had 3n ≤ c2n. Then c ≥ (3/2)n for any n
         ≥ n0. But (3/2)n gets arbitrarily large as n gets large, so no constant c can exceed (3/2)n for




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (16 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         all n.

            When we say T(n) is O(f(n)), we know that f(n) is an upper bound on the growth rate of
         T(n). To specify a lower bound on the growth rate of T(n) we can use the notation T(n) is
         Ω(g(n)), read "big omega of g(n)" or just "omega of g(n)," to mean that there exists a
         positive constant c such that T(n) ≥ cg(n) infinitely often (for an infinite number of values
         of n).†

         Example 1.6. To verify that the function T(n)= n3 + 2n2 is Ω(n3), let c = 1. Then T(n) ≥ cn3
         for n = 0, 1, . . ..

            For another example, let T(n) = n for odd n ≥ 1 and T(n) = n2/100 for even n ≥ 0. To
         verify that T(n) is Ω (n2), let c = 1/100 and consider the infinite set of n's: n = 0, 2, 4, 6, . . ..


         The Tyranny of Growth Rate
         We shall assume that programs can be evaluated by comparing their running-time
         functions, with constants of proportionality neglected. Under this assumption a program
         with running time O(n2) is better than one with running time O(n3), for example. Besides
         constant factors due to the compiler and machine, however, there is a constant factor due to
         the nature of the program itself. It is possible, for example, that with a particular compiler-
         machine combination, the first program takes 100n2 milliseconds, while the second takes
         5n3 milliseconds. Might not the 5n3 program be better than the 100n2 program?

            The answer to this question depends on the sizes of inputs the programs are expected to
         process. For inputs of size n < 20, the program with running time 5n3 will be faster than the
         one with running time 100n2. Therefore, if the program is to be run mainly on inputs of
         small size, we would indeed prefer the program whose running time was O(n3). However,
         as n gets large, the ratio of the running times, which is 5n3/100n2 = n/20, gets arbitrarily
         large. Thus, as the size of the input increases, the O(n3) program will take significantly
         more time than the O(n2) program. If there are even a few large inputs in the mix of
         problems these two programs are designed to solve, we can be much better off with the
         program whose running time has the lower growth rate.

            Another reason for at least considering programs whose growth rates are as low as
         possible is that the growth rate ultimately determines how big a problem we can solve on a
         computer. Put another way, as computers get faster, our desire to solve larger problems on
         them continues to increase. However, unless a program has a low growth rate such as O(n)
         or O(nlogn), a modest increase in computer speed makes very little difference in the size of
         the largest problem we can solve in a fixed amount of time.

         Example 1.7. In Fig. 1.11 we see the running times of four programs with different time
         complexities, measured in seconds, for a particular compiler-machine combination.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (17 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         Suppose we can afford 1000 seconds, or about 17 minutes, to solve a given problem. How
         large a problem can we solve? In 103 seconds, each of the four algorithms can solve
         roughly the same size problem, as shown in the second column of Fig. 1.12.




                                          Fig. 1.11. Running times of four programs.

            Suppose that we now buy a machine that runs ten times faster at no additional cost.
         Then for the same cost we can spend 104 seconds on a problem where we spent 103
         seconds before. The maximum size problem we can now solve using each of the four
         programs is shown in the third column of Fig. 1.12, and the ratio of the third and second
         columns is shown in the fourth column. We observe that a 1000% improvement in
         computer speed yields only a 30% increase in the size of problem we can solve if we use
         the O(2n) program. Additional factors of ten speedup in the computer yield an even smaller
         percentage increase in problem size. In effect, the O(2n) program can solve only small
         problems no matter how fast the underlying computer.




                               Fig. 1.12. Effect of a ten-fold speedup in computation time.

            In the third column of Fig. 1.12 we see the clear superiority of the O(n) program; it
         returns a 1000% increase in problem size for a 1000% increase in computer speed. We see
         that the O(n3) and O(n2) programs return, respectively, 230% and 320% increases in
         problem size for 1000% increases in speed. These ratios will be maintained for additional
         increases in speed.

            As long as the need for solving progressively larger problems exists, we are led to an
         almost paradoxical conclusion. As computation becomes cheaper and machines become
         faster, as will most surely continue to happen, our desire to solve larger and more complex
         problems will continue to increase. Thus, the discovery and use of efficient algorithms,
         those whose growth rates are low, becomes more rather than less important.


         A Few Grains of Salt
         We wish to re-emphasize that the growth rate of the worst case running time is not the sole,
         or necessarily even the most important, criterion for evaluating an algorithm or program.
         Let us review some conditions under which the running time of a program can be
         overlooked in favor of other issues.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (18 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




              1. If a program is to be used only a few times, then the cost of writing and debugging
                 dominate the overall cost, so the actual running time rarely affects the total cost. In
                 this case, choose the algorithm that is easiest to implement correctly.

              2. If a program is to be run only on "small" inputs, the growth rate of the running time
                 may be less important than the constant factor in the formula for running time. What
                 is a "small" input depends on the exact running times of the competing algorithms.
                 There are some algorithms, such as the integer multiplication algorithm due to
                 Schonhage and Strassen [1971], that are asymptotically the most efficient known for
                 their problem, but have never been used in practice even on the largest problems,
                 because the constant of proportionality is so large in comparison to other simpler,
                 less "efficient" algorithms.

              3. A complicated but efficient algorithm may not be desirable because a person other
                 than the writer may have to maintain the program later. It is hoped that by making
                 the principal techniques of efficient algorithm design widely known, more complex
                 algorithms may be used freely, but we must consider the possibility of an entire
                 program becoming useless because no one can understand its subtle but efficient
                 algorithms.

              4. There are a few examples where efficient algorithms use too much space to be
                 implemented without using slow secondary storage, which may more than negate
                 the efficiency.

              5. In numerical algorithms, accuracy and stability are just as important as efficiency.


         1.5 Calculating the Running Time of a
         Program
         Determining, even to within a constant factor, the running time of an arbitrary program can
         be a complex mathematical problem. In practice, however, determining the running time of
         a program to within a constant factor is usually not that difficult; a few basic principles
         suffice. Before presenting these principles, it is important that we learn how to add and
         multiply in "big oh" notation.

            Suppose that T1(n) and T2(n) are the running times of two program fragments P1 and P2,
         and that T1(n) is O(f(n)) and T2(n) is O(g(n)). Then T1(n)+T2(n), the running time of P1
         followed by P2, is O(max(f(n),g(n))). To see why, observe that for some constants c1, c2,
         n1, and n2, if n ≥ n1 then T1(n) ≤ c1f(n), and if n ≥ n2 then T2(n) ≤ c2g(n). Let n0 = max(n1,
         n2). If n ≥ n0, then T1(n) + T2(n) ≤ c1f(n) + c2g(n). From this we conclude that if n ≥ n0,
         then T1(n) + T2(n) ≤ (c1 + c2)max(f(n), g(n)). Therefore, the combined running time T1(n) +
         T2(n) is O (max(f (n), g (n))).




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (19 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         Example 1.8. The rule for sums given above can be used to calculate the running time of a
         sequence of program steps, where each step may be an arbitrary program fragment with
         loops and branches. Suppose that we have three steps whose running times are,
         respectively, O(n2), O(n3) and O(n log n). Then the running time of the first two steps
         executed sequentially is O(max(n2, n3)) which is O(n3). The running time of all three
         together is O(max(n3, n log n)) which is O(n3).

            In general, the running time of a fixed sequence of steps is, to within a constant factor,
         the running time of the step with the largest running time. In rare circumstances there will
         be two or more steps whose running times are incommensurate (neither is larger than the
         other, nor are they equal). For example, we could have steps of running times O(f (n)) and
         O(g (n)), where




         In such cases the sum rule must be applied directly; the running time is O(max(f(n), g(n))),
         that is, n4 if n is even and n3 if n is odd.

            Another useful observation about the sum rule is that if g(n) ≤ f(n) for all n above some
         constant n0, then O(f(n) + g(n)) is the same as O(f(n)). For example, O(n2+n) is the same as
         O(n2).

            The rule for products is the following. If T1(n) and T2(n) are O(f(n)) and O(g(n)),
         respectively, then T1(n)T2(n) is O(f(n)g(n)). The reader should prove this fact using the
         same ideas as in the proof of the sum rule. It follows from the product rule that O(cf(n))
         means the same thing as O(f(n)) if c is any positive constant. For example, O(n2/2) is the
         same as O(n2).

            Before proceeding to the general rules for analyzing the running times of programs, let
         us take a simple example to get an overview of the process.

         Example 1.9. Consider the sorting program bubble of Fig. 1.13, which sorts an array of
         integers into increasing order. The net effect of each pass of the inner loop of statements (3)-
         (6) is to "bubble" the smallest element toward the front of the array.


                procedure bubble ( var A: array [1..n] of integer );
                  { bubble sorts array A into increasing order }
                var



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (20 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                  i, j, temp: integer;
                  begin
         (1)          for i := 1 to n-1 do
         (2)              for j := n downto i+1 do
         (3)                 if A[j-1] > A[j] then begin
                               { swap A[j - 1] and A[j] }
         (4)                     temp := A[j-1];
         (5)                     A[j-1] := A[j];
         (6)                     AI> [j] := temp
                            end
                  end; { bubble }

                                                       Fig. 1.13. Bubble sort.

            The number n of elements to be sorted is the appropriate measure of input size. The first
         observation we make is that each assignment statement takes some constant amount of
         time, independent of the input size. That is to say, statements (4), (5) and (6) each take O(1)
         time. Note that O(1) is "big oh" notation for "some constant amount." By the sum rule, the
         combined running time of this group of statements is O(max(1, 1, 1)) = O(1).

             Now we must take into account the conditional and looping statements. The if- and for-
         statements are nested within one another, so we may work from the inside out to get the
         running time of the conditional group and each loop. For the if-statement, testing the
         condition requires O(1) time. We don't know whether the body of the if-statement (lines (4)-
         (6)) will be executed. Since we are looking for the worst-case running time, we assume the
         worst and suppose that it will. Thus, the if-group of statements (3)-(6) takes O(1) time.

             Proceeding outward, we come to the for-loop of lines (2)-(6). The general rule for a loop
         is that the running time is the sum, over each iteration of the loop, of the time spent
         executing the loop body for that iteration. We must, however, charge at least O(1) for each
         iteration to account for incrementing the index, for testing to see whether the limit has been
         reached, and for jumping back to the beginning of the loop. For lines (2)-(6) the loop body
         takes O(1) time for each iteration. The number of iterations of the loop is n-i, so by the
         product rule, the time spent in the loop of lines (2)-(6) is O((n-i) X 1) which is O(n-i).

             Now let us progress to the outer loop, which contains all the executable statements of
         the program. Statement (1) is executed n - 1 times, so the total running time of the program
         is bounded above by some constant times




         which is O(n2). The program of Fig. 1.13, therefore, takes time proportional to the square
         of the number of items to be sorted. In Chapter 8, we shall give sorting programs whose



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (21 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         running time is O(nlogn), which is considerably smaller, since for large n, logn† is very
         much smaller than n.

            Before proceeding to some general analysis rules, let us remember that determining a
         precise upper bound on the running time of programs is sometimes simple, but at other
         times it can be a deep intellectual challenge. There are no complete sets of rules for
         analyzing programs. We can only give the reader some hints and illustrate some of the
         subtler points by examples throughout this book.

            Now let us enumerate some general rules for the analysis of programs. In general, the
         running time of a statement or group of statements may be parameterized by the input size
         and/or by one or more variables. The only permissible parameter for the running time of the
         whole program is n, the input size.

              1. The running time of each assignment, read, and write statement can usually be taken
                 to be O(1). There are a few exceptions, such as in PL/I, where assignments can
                 involve arbitrarily large arrays, and in any language that allows function calls in
                 assignment statements.

              2. The running time of a sequence of statements is determined by the sum rule. That is,
                 the running time of the sequence is, to within a constant factor, the largest running
                 time of any statement in the sequence.

              3. The running time of an if-statement is the cost of the conditionally executed
                 statements, plus the time for evaluating the condition. The time to evaluate the
                 condition is normally O(1). The time for an if-then-else construct is the time to
                 evaluate the condition plus the larger of the time needed for the statements executed
                 when the condition is true and the time for the statements executed when the
                 condition is false.

              4. The time to execute a loop is the sum, over all times around the loop, of the time to
                 execute the body and the time to evaluate the condition for termination (usually the
                 latter is O(1)). Often this time is, neglecting constant factors, the product of the
                 number of times around the loop and the largest possible time for one execution of
                 the body, but we must consider each loop separately to make sure. The number of
                 iterations around a loop is usually clear, but there are times when the number of
                 iterations cannot be computed precisely. It could even be that the program is not an
                 algorithm, and there is no limit to the number of times we go around certain loops.


         Procedure Calls
         If we have a program with procedures, none of which is recursive, then we can compute the
         running time of the various procedures one at a time, starting with those procedures that
         make no calls on other procedures. (Remember to count a function invocation as a "call.")
         There must be at least one such procedure, else at least one procedure is recursive. We can



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (22 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         then evaluate the running time of procedures that call only procedures that make no calls,
         using the already-evaluated running times of the called procedures. We continue this
         process, evaluating the running time of each procedure after the running times of all
         procedures it calls have been evaluated.

            If there are recursive procedures, then we cannot find an ordering of all the procedures
         so that each calls only previously evaluated procedures. What we must now do is associate
         with each recursive procedure an unknown time function T(n), where n measures the size of
         the arguments to the procedure. We can then get a recurrence for T(n), that is, an equation
         for T(n) in terms of T(k) for various values of k.

             Techniques for solving many different kinds of recurrences exist; we shall present some
         of these in Chapter 9. Here we shall show how to analyze a simple recursive program.

         Example 1.10. Figure 1.14 gives a recursive program to compute n!, the product of all the
         integers from 1 to n inclusive.

            An appropriate size measure for this function is the value of n. Let T(n) be the running
         time for fact(n). The running time for lines (1) and (2) is O(1), and for line (3) it is O(1) +
         T(n-1). Thus, for some constants c and d,




             function fact ( n: integer ): integer;
               { fact(n) computes n! }
               begin
         (1)      if n <= 1 then
         (2)          fact := 1
                 else
         (3)          fact := n * fact(n-1)
               end; { fact }

                                   Fig. 1.14. Receursive program to compute factorials.

         Assuming n > 2, we can expand T(n-1) in (1.1) to obtain

                                                     T(n) = 2c + T(n-2) if n > 2

         That is, T(n-1) = c + T(n-2), as can be seen by substituting n-1 for n in (1.1). Thus, we may
         substitute c + T(n-2) for T(n-1) in the equation T(n) = c + T(n-1). We can then use (1.1) to
         expand T(n-2) to obtain



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (23 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                                                     T(n) = 3c + T(n-3) if n > 3

         and so on. In general,

                                                      T(n) = ic + T(n-i) if n > i

         Finally, when i = n-1 we get

                                          T(n) = c(n-1) + T(1) = c(n-1) + d                      (1.2)

         From (1.2) we can conclude that T(n) is O(n). We should note that in this analysis we have
         assumed that the multiplication of two integers is an O(1) operation. In practice, however,
         we cannot use the program in Fig. 1.14 to compute n! for large values of n, because the size
         of the integers being computed will exceed the word length of the underlying machine.

             The general method for solving recurrence equations, as typified by Example 1.10, is
         repeatedly to replace terms T(k) on the right side of the equation by the entire right side
         with k substituted for n, until we obtain a formula in which T does not appear on the right
         as in (1.2). Often we must then sum a series or, if we cannot sum it exactly, get a close
         upper bound on the sum to obtain an upper bound on T(n).


         Programs with GOTO's
         In analyzing the running time of a program we have tacitly assumed that all flow of control
         within a procedure was determined by branching and 1ooping constructs. We relied on this
         fact as we determined the running time of progressively larger groups of statements by
         assuming that we needed only the sum rule to group sequences of statements together. Goto
         statments, however, make the logical grouping of statements more complex. For this
         reason, goto statements should be avoided, but Pascal lacks break- and continue-statements
         to jump out of loops. The goto-statement is often used as a substitute for statements of this
         nature in Pascal.

             We suggest the following approach to handling goto's that jump from a loop to code that
         is guaranteed to follow the loop, which is generally the only kind of goto that is justified.
         As the goto is presumably executed conditionally within the loop, we may pretend that it is
         never taken. Because the goto takes us to a statement that will be executed after the loop
         completes, this assumption is conservative; we can never underestimate the worst case
         running time of the program if we assume the loop runs to completion. However, it is a rare
         program in which ignoring the goto is so conservative that it causes us to overestimate the
         growth rate of the worst case running time for the program. Notice that if we were faced
         with a goto that jumped back to previously executed code we could not ignore it safely,
         since that goto may create a loop that accounts for the bulk of the running time.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (24 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




             We should not leave the impression that the use of backwards goto's by themselves
         make running times unanalyzable. As long as the loops of a program have a reasonable
         structure, that is, each pair of loops are either disjoint or nested one within the other, then
         the approach to running time analysis described in this section will work. (However, it
         becomes the responsibility of the analyzer to ascertain what the loop structure is.) Thus, we
         should not hesitate to apply these methods of program analysis to a language like Fortran,
         where goto's are essential, but where programs written in the language tend to have a
         reasonable loop structure.


         Analyzing a Pseudo-Program
         If we know the growth rate of the time needed to execute informal English statements, we
         can analyze pseudo-programs just as we do real ones. Often, however, we do not know the
         time to be spent on not-fully-implemented parts of a pseudo-program. For example, if we
         have a pseudo-program in which the only unimplemented parts are operations on ADT's,
         one of several implementations for an ADT may be chosen, and the overall running time
         may depend heavily on the implementation. Indeed, one of the reasons for writing
         programs in terms of ADT's is so we can consider the trade-offs among the running times
         of the various operations that we obtain by different implementations.

            To analyze pseudo-programs consisting of programming language statements and calls
         to unimplemented procedures, such as operations on ADT's, we compute the running time
         as a function of unspecified running times for each procedure. The running time for a
         procedure will be parameterized by the "size" of the argument or arguments for that
         procedure. Just as for "input size," the appropriate measure of size for an argument is a
         matter for the analyzer to decide. If the procedure is an operation on an ADT, then the
         underlying mathematical model for the ADT often indicates the logical notion of size. For
         example, if the ADT is based on sets, the number of elements in a set is often the right
         notion of size. In the remaining chapters we shall see many examples of analyzing the
         running time of pseudo-programs.


         1.6 Good Programming Practice
         There are a substantial number of ideas we should bear in mind when designing an
         algorithm and implementing it as a program. These ideas often appear platitudinous,
         because by-and-large they can be appreciated only through their successful use in real
         problems, rather than by development of a theory. They are sufficiently important,
         however, that they are worth repeating here. The reader should watch for the application of
         these ideas in the programs designed in this book, as well as looking for opportunities to
         put them into practice in his own programs.

              1. Plan the design of a program. We mentioned in Section 1.1 how a program can be
                 designed by first sketching the algorithm informally, then as a pseudo-program, and
                 gradually refining the pseudo-program until it becomes executable code. This


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (25 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                  strategy of sketch-then-detail tends to produce a more organized final program that
                  is easier to debug and maintain.

              2. Encapsulate. Use procedures and ADT's to place the code for each principal
                 operation and type of data in one place in the program listing. Then, if changes
                 become necessary, the section of code requiring change will be localized.

              3. Use or modify an existing program. One of the chief inefficiencies in the
                 programming process is that usually a project is tackled as if it were the first
                 program ever written. One should first look for an existing program that does all or a
                 part of the task. Conversely, when writing a program, one should consider making it
                 available to others for possibly unanticipated uses.

              4. Be a toolsmith. In programming parlance, a tool is a program with a variety of uses.
                 When writing a program, consider whether it could be written in a somewhat more
                 general way with little extra effort. For example, suppose one is assigned the task of
                 writing a program to schedule final examinations. Instead, write a tool that takes an
                 arbitrary graph and colors the vertices with as few colors as possible, so that no two
                 vertices connected by an edge have the same color. In the context of examination
                 scheduling, the vertices are classes, the colors are examination periods, and an edge
                 between two classes means that the classes have a student in common. The coloring
                 program, together with routines that translate class lists into graphs and colors into
                 specific times and days, is the examination scheduler. However, the coloring
                 program can be used for problems totally unrelated to examination scheduling, such
                 as the traffic light problem of Section 1.1.

              5. Program at the command level. Often we cannot find in a library the one program
                 needed to do a job, nor can we adapt one tool to do the job. A well-designed
                 operating system will allow us to connect a network of available programs together
                 without writing any programs at all, except for one list of operating system
                 commands. To make commands composable, it is generally necessary that each
                 behave as a filter, a program with one input file and one output file. Notice that any
                 number of filters can be composed, and if the command language of the operating
                 system is intelligently designed, merely listing the commands in the order in which
                 they are to be performed will suffice as a program.

         Example 1.11. As an example, let us consider the program spell, as it was originally
         written by S.C. Johnson from UNIX† commands. This program takes as input a file
         f1consisting of English text and produces as output all those words in f1that are not found in
         a small dictionary.‡ spell tends to list proper names as misspellings and may also list real
         words not in its dictionary, but the typical output of spell is short enough that it can be
         scanned by eye, and human intelligence can be used to determine whether a word in the
         output of spell is a misspelling. (This book was checked using spell.)

            The first filter used by spell is a command called translate that, given appropriate
         parameters, replaces capital letters by lower case letters and blanks by newlines, leaving



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (26 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         other characters unchanged. The output of translate consists of a file f2 that has the words
         of f1, uncapitalized, one to a line. Next comes a command sort that sorts the lines of its
         input file into lexicographic (alphabetical) order. The output of sort is a file f3 that has all
         the words of f2 in alphabetical order, with repetitions. Then a command unique removes
         duplicate lines from its input file, producing an output file f4 that has the words of the
         original file, without capitalization or duplicates, in alphabetical order. Finally, a command
         diff, with a parameter indicating a second file f5 that holds the alphabetized list of words in
         the dictionary, one to a line, is applied to f4. The result is all words in f4 (and hence f1) but
         not in f5, i.e., all words in the original input that are not in the dictionary. The complete
         program spell is just the following sequence of commands.

                     spell :      translate [A-Z] → [a-z], blank → newline
                                  sort
                                  unique
                                  diff dictionary

            Command level programming requires discipline from a community of programmers;
         they must write programs as filters wherever possible, and they must write tools instead of
         special purpose programs wherever possible. Yet the reward, in terms of the overall ratio of
         work to results, is substantial.


         1.7 Super Pascal
         Most of the programs written in this book are in Pascal. To make programs more readable,
         however, we occasionally use three constructs not found in standard Pascal, each of which
         can be mechanically translated into pure Pascal. One such construct is the nonnumeric
         label. The few times we need labels, we shall use nonnumeric labels since they make
         programs easier to understand. For example, "goto output" is invariably more meaningful
         than "goto 561." To convert a program containing nonnumeric labels into pure Pascal, we
         must replace each nonnumeric label by a distinct numeric label and we must then declare
         those labels with a label declaration at the beginning of the program. This process can be
         clone mechanically.

             The second nonstandard construct is the return statement, which we use because it
         allows us to write more understandable programs without using goto statements to interrupt
         the flow of control. The return statement we use has the form

                     return (expression)

         where the (expression) is optional. We can convert a procedure containing return
         statements into a standard Pascal program quite simply. First, we declare a new label, say
         999, and let it label the last end statement of the procedure. If the statement return (x)
         appears in a function zap, say, we replace this statement with the block



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (27 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                begin
                    zap := x;
                    goto 999
                end



         In a procedure, the statement return, which can have no argument, is simply replaced by
         goto 999.

         Example 1.12. Figure 1.15 shows the factorial program written using return statements.
         Figure 1.16 shows the resulting Pascal program if we apply this transformation
         systematically to Fig. 1.15.


                function fact ( n: integer ): integer;
                   begin
                     if n <= l then
                        return (1)
                     else
                        return ( n * fact(n- 1))
                   end; { fact }

                                    Fig. 1.15. Factorial program with return statements.

         The third extension is that we use expressions as names of types


                function fact ( n: integer ) :integer;
                  label
                    999;
                  begin
                    if n <= 1 then
                       begin
                          fact := 1;
                          goto 999
                       end
                    else
                       begin
                          fact := n * fact(n - 1);
                          goto 999
                       end
                 999:
                 end; { fact }


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (28 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                                              Fig. 1.16. Resulting Pascal program.

         uniformly throughout a program. For example, an expression like ↑ celltype, while
         permissible everywhere else, is not permitted as the type of a parameter of a procedure or
         the type of the value returned by a function. Technically, Pascal requires that we invent a
         name for the type expression, say ptrtocell. In this book, we shall allow such expressions,
         expecting that the reader could invent such a type name and mechanically replace type
         expressions by the type name. Thus, we shall write statements like

                 function zap ( A: array[1..10] of integer ) : ↑ celltype

         to stand for

                 function zap (A: arrayoftenints ) : ptrtocell

            Finally, a note on our typesetting conventions for programs. Pascal reserved words are
         in boldface, types are in roman, and procedure, function, and variable names are in italic.
         We distinguish between upper and lower case letters.


         Exercises

                      There are six teams in the football league: the Vultures, the Lions, the Eagles,
                      the Beavers, the Tigers, and the Skunks. The Vultures have already played the
                      Lions and the Eagles; the Lions have also played the Beavers and Skunks. The
                      Tigers have played the Eagles and Skunks. Each team plays one game per
               1.1    week. Find a schedule so that all teams will have played each other in the
                      fewest number of weeks. Hint. Create a graph whose vertices are the pairs of
                      teams that have not yet played each other. What should the edges be so that in a
                      legal coloring of the graph, each color can represent the games played in one
                      week?

                      Consider a robot arm that is fixed at one end. The arm contains two elbows at
                      each of which it is possible to rotate the arm 90 degrees up and down in a
             *1.2     vertical plane. How would you mathematically model the possible movements
                      of the end of the arm? Describe an algorithm to move the end of the robot arm
                      from one permissible position to another.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (29 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                      Suppose we wish to multiply four matrices of real numbers M1 × M2 × M3 × M4
                      where M1 is 10 by 20, M2 is 20 by 50, M3 is 50 by 1, and M4 is 1 by 100.
                      Assume that the multiplication of a p × q matrix by a q × r matrix requires pqr
             *1.3     scalar operations, as it does in the usual matrix multiplication algorithm. Find
                      the optimal order in which to multiply the matrices so as to minimize the total
                      number of scalar operations. How would you find this optimal ordering if there
                      are an arbitrary number of matrices?

                 Suppose we wish to partition the square roots of the integers from 1 to 100 into
                 two piles of fifty numbers each, such that the sum of the numbers in the first
           **1.4 pile is as close as possible to the sum of the numbers in the second pile. If we
                 could use two minutes of computer time to help answer this question, what
                 computations would you perform in those two minutes?

                      Describe a greedy algorithm for playing chess. Would you expect it to perform
               1.5
                      very well?

                      In Section 1.2 we considered an ADT SET, with operations MAKE-NULL,
                      UNION, and SIZE. Suppose for convenience that we assume all sets are subsets
               1.6    of {0, 1, . . . , 31} and let the ADT SET be interpreted as the Pascal data type
                      set of 0..31. Write Pascal procedures for these operations using this
                      implementation of SET.

                      The greatest common divisor of two integers p and q is the largest integer d that
                      divides both p and q evenly. We wish to develop a program for computing the
                      greatest common divisor of two integers p and q using the following algorithm.
                      Let r be the remainder of p divided by q. If r is O, then q is the greatest
                      common divisor. Otherwise, set p equal to q, then q equal to r, and repeat the
                      process.

               1.7                   a. Show that this process does find the correct greatest
                                        common divisor.

                                     b. Refine this algorithm into a pseudo-language program.

                                     c. Convert your pseudo-language program into a Pascal
                                        program.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (30 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                      We want to develop a program for a text formatter that will place words on
                      lines that are both left and right justified. The program will have a word buffer
                      and a line buffer. Initially both are empty. A word is read into the word buffer.
                      If there is sufficient room in the line buffer, the word is transferred to the line
                      buffer. Otherwise, additional spaces are inserted between words in the line
                      buffer to fill out the line, and then the line buffer is emptied by printing the line.
               1.8
                                     a. Refine this algorithm into a pseudo-language program.

                                     b. Convert your pseudo-language program to a Pascal
                                        program.


                      Consider a set of n cities and a table of distances between pairs of cities. Write a
                      pseudo-language program for finding a short path that goes through each city
                      exactly once and returns to the city from which it started. There is no known
               1.9
                      method for obtaining the shortest such tour except by exhaustive searching.
                      Thus try to find an efficient algorithm for this problem using some reasonable
                      heuristic.

                      Consider the following functions of n:




             1.10




                      Indicate for each distinct pair i and j whether fi(n) is O(fj(n)) and whether fi(n) is
                      Ω(fj(n)).




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (31 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                      Consider the following functions of n:




             1.11




                      Indicate for each distinct pair i and j whether gi(n) is O(gj(n)) and whether gi(n)
                      is Ω(gj(n)).


                      Give, using "big oh" notation, the worst case running times of the following
                      procedures as a function of n.


                        a.         procedure matmpy ( n: integer);
                                       var
                                          i, j, k: integer;
                                       begin
                                          for i := 1 to n do
                                               for j := 1 to n do begin
                                                    C[i, j] := O;
                                                    for k := 1 to n do
                                                       C[i, j] := C[i, j,] + A[i, k] * B[k, j]
                                               end
                                          end

                        b.         procedure mystery ( n: integer);
                                       var
                                          i, j, k: integer;
                                       begin
                                          for i:= 1 to n-1 do
                                          for j:= i + 1 to n do
                                             for k := 1 to j do
                                                 { some statement requiring O(1) time }
                                       end

             1.12
                        c.         procedure veryodd ( n: integer );
                                       var



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (32 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                                           i, j, x, y: integer;
                                         begin
                                           for i := 1 to n do
                                             if odd(i) then begin
                                                 for j := i to n do
                                                  x := x + 1;
                                                 for j := 1 to i do
                                                  y := y + l
                                            end
                                         end



                        d.         function recursive (n: integer ) : integer;
                                        begin
                                          if n <= 1 then
                                              return (l)
                                          else
                                              return (recursive(n-1) + recursive(n-1))
                                        end




                      Show that the following statements are true.

                                     a. 17 is O(1).

                                     b. n(n-1)/2 is O(n2).

                                     c. max(n3, 10n2) is O(n3).
             1.13




                                e) If p(x) is any kth degree polynomial with a positive leading
                                coefficient, then p(n) is O(nk) and Ω(nk).




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (33 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:23]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                      Suppose T1(n) is Ω(f(n)) and T2(n) is Ω(g(n)). Which of the following
                      statements are true?

           *1.14                     a. T1(n) + T2(n) is Ω(max(f(n), g(n))).

                                     b. T1(n)T2(n) is Ω(f(n)g(n)).


                      Some authors define big omega by saying f(n) is Ω(g(n)) if there is some n0 and
                      c > 0 such that for all n ≥ n0 we have f(n) ≥ cg(n).

                                     a. Is it true for this definition that f(n) is Ω(g(n)) if and only
                                        if g(n) is O(f(n))?
           *1.15
                                     b. Is (a) true for the definition of big omega in Section 1.4?

                                     c. Does Exercise 1.14(a) or (b) hold for this definition of big
                                        omega?


                      Order the following functions by growth rate: (a) n, (b) √¯n, (c) logn, (d)
             1.16
                      loglogn, (e) log2n, (f) n/logn, (g) √¯nlog2n, (h) (1/3)n, (i) (3/2)n, (j) 17.

                      Assume the parameter n in the procedure below is a positive power of 2, i.e., n
                      = 2, 4, 8, 16 , . . .. Give the formula that expresses the value of the variable
                      count in terms of the value of n when the procedure terminates.

                                 procedure mystery ( n: integer );
                                     var
                                        x, count: integer;
                                     begin
             1.17                       count := 0;
                                        x := 2;
                                        while x < n do begin
                                            x := 2 * x;
                                            count := count + 1
                                        end;
                                        writeln(count)
                                     end




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (34 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:23]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                      Here is a function max(i, n) that returns the largest element in positions i
                      through i+n-1 of an integer array A. You may assume for convenience that n is
                      a power of 2.

                                   function max ( i, n: integer ): integer;

                                       var

                                           m1, m2: integer;

                                       begin

                                           if n = 1 then

                                               return (A[i])

                                           else begin

                                               m1 := max(i, n div 2);

                                               m2 := max(i+n div 2,
                      n div 2);
             1.18                              if m1 < m2 then

                                                   return (m2)

                                               else

                                                   return (m1)

                                           end

                                       end



                            a. Let T(n) be the worst-case time taken by max with second argument n.
                               That is, n is the number of elements of which the largest is found. Write
                               an equation expressing T(n) in terms of T(j) for one or more values of j
                               less than n and a constant or constants that represent the times taken by
                               individual statements of the max program.

                           b. Give a tight big oh upper bound on T(n). Your answer should be equal to
                              the big omega lower bound, and be as simple as possible.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (35 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:23]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




         Bibliographic Notes
         The concept of an abstract data type can be traced to the class type in the language
         SIMULA 67 (Birtwistle et al. [1973]). Since that time, a variety of other languages that
         support abstract data types have been developed including Alphard (Shaw, Wulf, and
         London [1977]), C with classes (Stroustrup [1982]), CLU (Liskov, et al. [1977]), MESA
         (Geschke, Morris, and Satterthwaite [1977]), and Russell (Demers and Donahue [1979]).
         The ADT concept is further discussed in works such as Gotlieb and Gotlieb [1978] and
         Wulf et al. [1981].

            Knuth [1968] was the first major work to advocate the systematic study of the running
         time of programs. Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [1974] relate the time and space complexity
         of algorithms to various models of computation, such as Turing machines and random-
         access machines. See also the bibliographic notes to Chapter 9 for more references to the
         subject of analysis of algorithms and programs.

            For additional material on structured programming see Hoare, Dahl, and Dijkstra
         [1972], Wirth [1973], Kernighan and Plauger [1974], and Yourdon and Constantine [1975].
         Organizational and psychological problems arising in the development of large software
         projects are discussed in Brooks [1974] and Weinberg [1971]. Kernighan and Plauger
         [1981] show how to build useful software tools for a programming environment.

         † The symbol Ø stands for the empty set.

         ‡ We distinguish the abstract data type SET from the built-in set type of Pascal.

         † The record has no known name because it was created by a call new(header), which made
         header point to this newly-created record. Internal to the machine, however, there is a
         memory address that can be used to locate the cell.

         † Note the asymmetry between big-oh and big-omega notation. The reason such asymmetry
         is often useful is that there are many times when an algorithm is fast on many but not all
         inputs. For example, there are algorithms to test whether their input is of prime length that
         run very fast whenever that length is even, so we could not get a good lower bound on
         running time that held for all n ≥ n0.

         † Unless otherwise specified all logarithms are to the base 2. Note that O(logn) does not
         depend on the base of the logarithm since logan = clogbn, where c = logab.

         † UNIX is a Trademark of Bell Laboratories.

         ‡ We could use an unabridged dictionary, but many misspellings are real words one has
         never heard of.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (36 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:23]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 1: Design and Analysis of Algorithms




                                              Table of Contents           Go to Chapter 2




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1201.htm (37 of 37) [1.7.2001 18:58:23]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          Basic Abstract DataTypes
          In this chapter we shall study some of the most fundamental abstract data types. We
          consider lists, which are sequences of elements, and two special cases of lists: stacks,
          where elements are inserted and deleted at one end only, and queues, where elements
          are inserted at one end and deleted at the other. We then briefly study the mapping or
          associative store, an ADT that behaves as a function. For each of these ADT's we
          consider several implementations and compare their relative merits.


          2.1 The Abstract Data Type "List"
          Lists are a particularly flexible structure because they can grow and shrink on
          demand, and elements can be accessed, inserted, or deleted at any position within a
          list. Lists can also be concatenated together or split into sublists. Lists arise routinely
          in applications such as information retrieval, programming language translation, and
          simulation. Storage management techniques of the kind we discuss in Chapter 12 use
          list-processing techniques extensively. In this section we shall introduce a number of
          basic list operations, and in the remainder of this chapter present data structures for
          lists that support various subsets of these operations efficiently.

            Mathematically, a list is a sequence of zero or more elements of a given type
          (which we generally call the elementtype). We often represent such a list by a
          comma-separated sequence of elements

                                                             al, a2, . . . ,an

          where n ≥ 0, and each ai is of type elementtype. The number n of elements is said to
          be the length of the list. Assuming n ≥ 1, we say that a1 is the first element and an is
          the last element. If n = 0, we have an empty list, one which has no elements.

              An important property of a list is that its elements can be linearly ordered
          according to their position on the list. We say ai precedes ai+1 for i = 1, 2, . . . , n-1,
          and ai follows ai-1 for i = 2, 3, . . . ,n. We say that the element ai is at position i. It is
          also convenient to postulate the existence of a position following the last element on
          a list. The function END(L) will return the position following position n in an n-
          element list L. Note that position END(L) has a distance from the beginning of the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (1 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          list that varies as the list grows or shrinks, while all other positions have a fixed
          distance from the beginning of the list.

              To form an abstract data type from the mathematical notion of a list we must
          define a set of operations on objects of type LIST.† As with many other ADT's we
          discuss in this book, no one set of operations is suitable for all applications. Here, we
          shall give one representative set of operations. In the next section we shall offer
          several data structures to represent lists and we shall write procedures for the typical
          list operations in terms of these data structures.

              To illustrate some common operations on lists, let us consider a typical
          application in which we have a mailing list from which we wish to purge duplicate
          entries. Conceptually, this problem can be solved quite simply: for each item on the
          list, remove all equivalent following items. To present this algorithm, however, we
          need to define operations that find the first element on a list, step through all
          successive elements, and retrieve and delete elements.

              We shall now present a representative set of list operations. In what follows, L is
          a list of objects of type elementtype, x is an object of that type, and p is of type
          position. Note that "position" is another data type whose implementation will vary
          for different list implementations. Even though we informally think of positions as
          integers, in practice, they may have another representation.

               1. INSERT(x, p, L). Insert x at position p in list L, moving elements at p and
                  following positions to the next higher position. That is, if L is al, a2, . . . ,an,
                  then L becomes a1, a2,. . . ,ap- 1, x, ap, . . . ,an. If p is END(L), then L becomes
                  a1, a2, . . . , an, x. If list L has no position p, the result is undefined.
               2. LOCATE(x, L). This function returns the position of x on list L. If x appears
                  more than once, then the position of the first occurrence is returned. If x does
                  not appear at all, then END(L) is returned.
               3. RETRIEVE(p, L). This function returns the element at position p on list L.
                  The result is undefined if p = END(L) or if L has no position p. Note that the
                  elements must be of a type that can be returned by a function if RETRIEVE is
                  used. In practice, however, we can always modify RETRIEVE to return a
                  pointer to an object of type elementtype.
               4. DELETE(p, L). Delete the element at position p of list L. If L is a1, a2, . . .
                  ,an, then L becomes a1, a2, . . . ,ap- 1, ap+1, . . . ,an. The result is undefined if L
                  has no position p or if p = END(L).
               5. NEXT(p, L) and PREVIOUS(p, L) return the positions following and
                  preceding position p on list L. If p is the last position on L, then NEXT(p, L) =
                  END(L). NEXT is undefined if p is END(L). PREVIOUS is undefined if p is



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (2 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                  1. Both functions are undefined if L has no position p.
               6. MAKENULL(L). This function causes L to become an empty list and returns
                  position END(L).
               7. FIRST(L). This function returns the first position on list L. If L is empty, the
                  position returned is END(L).
               8. PRINTLIST(L). Print the elements of L in the order of occurrence.

          Example 2.1. Let us write, using these operators, a procedure PURGE that takes a
          list as argument and eliminates duplicates from the list. The elements of the list are
          of type elementtype, and a list of such elements has type LIST, a convention we shall
          follow throughout this chapter. There is a function same(x,y), where x and y are of
          elementtype, that is true if x and y are "the same" and false if not. The notion of
          sameness is purposely left vague. If elementtype is real, for example, we might want
          same(x,y) true if and only if x = y. However, if elementtype is a record containing the
          account number, name, and address of a subscriber as in

            type
              elementtype = record
               acctno: integer;
               name: packed array [1..20] of char;
               address: packed array [1..50] of char
              end

          then we might want same(x, y) to be true whenever x.acctno=y.acctno.†

              Figure 2.1 shows the code for PURGE. The variables p and q are used to
          represent two positions in the list. As the program proceeds, duplicate copies of any
          elements to the left of position p have been deleted from the list. In one iteration of
          the loop (2)-(8), q is used to scan the list following position p to delete any duplicates
          of the element at position p. Then p is moved to the next position and the process is
          repeated.

             In the next section we shall provide appropriate declarations for LIST and
          position, and implementations for the operations so that PURGE becomes a working
          program. As written, the program is independent of the manner in which lists are
          represented so we are free to experiment with various list implementations.

              procedure PURGE ( var L: LIST );
                { PURGE removes duplicate elements from list L }
                var
                 p, q: position; { p will be the "current" position
                   in L, and q will move ahead to find equal elements }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (3 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                begin
          (1)     p := FIRST(L);
          (2)     while p <> END(L) do begin
          (3)        q := NEXT(p, L);
          (4)        while q <> END(L) do
          (5)           if same(RETRIEVE(p, L), RETRIEVE(q,
          L)) then
          (6)                 DELETE(q, L)
                      else
          (7)              q := NEXT(q, L);
          (8)        p := NEXT(p, L)
                 end
                end; { PURGE }

                                          Fig. 2.1. Program to remove duplicates.

             A point worth observing concerns the body of the inner loop, lines (4)-(7) of Fig.
          2.1. When we delete the element at position q at line (6), the elements that were at
          positions q+1, q+2, . . . , and so on, move up one position in the list. In particular,
          should q happen to be the last position on L, the value of q would become END(L). If
          we then executed line (7), NEXT(END(L), L) would produce an undefined result.
          Thus, it is essential that either (6) or (7), but never both, is executed between the tests
          for q = END(L) at line (4).


          2.2 Implementation of Lists
          In this section we shall describe some data structures that can be used to represent
          lists. We shall consider array, pointer, and cursor implementations of lists. Each of
          these implementations permits certain list operations to be done more efficiently than
          others.


          Array Implementation of Lists
          In an array implementation of a list, the elements are stored in contiguous cells of an
          array. With this representation a list is easily traversed and new elements can be
          appended readily to the tail of the list. Inserting an element into the middle of the list,
          however, requires shifting all following elements one place over in the array to make
          room for the new element. Similarly, deleting any element except the last also
          requires shifting elements to close up the gap.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (4 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                                          Fig. 2.2. Array implementation of a list.

              In the array implementation we define the type LIST to be a record having two
          fields. The first field is an array of elements whose length is sufficient to hold the
          maximum size list that will be encountered. The second field is an integer last
          indicating the position of the last list element in the array. The i th element of the list
          is in the ith cell of the array, for 1 ≤ i ≤ last, as shown in Fig. 2.2. Positions in the list
          are represented by integers, the ith position by the integer i. The function END(L)
          has only to return last + 1. The important declarations are:

            const
              maxlength = 100 { some suitable constant };
            type
              LIST = record
                elements: array[1..maxlength] of elementtype;
                last: integer
              end;
              position = integer;
            function END ( var L: LIST ): position;†
              begin
                return (L.last + 1)
              end; { END }

              Figure 2.3 shows how we might implement the operations INSERT, DELETE,
          and LOCATE using this array-based implementation. INSERT moves the elements
          at locations p,p+1, . . . , last into locations p+1, p+2, . . . ,last+1 and then inserts the
          new element at location p. If there is no room in the array for an additional element,
          the routine error is invoked, causing its argument to be printed, followed by
          termination of execution of the program. DELETE removes the element at position p
          by moving the elements at positions p + 1, p + 2, . . . , last into positions p, p+ 1, . . .
          , last-1. LOCATE sequentially scans the array to look for a given element. If the
          element is not found, LOCATE returns last+ 1.

             It should be clear how to encode the other list operations using this
          implementation of lists. For example, FIRST always returns 1; NEXT returns one
          more than its argument and PREVIOUS returns one less, each first checking that the
          result is in range; MAKENULL(L) sets L.last to 0.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (5 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




              If procedure PURGE of Fig. 2.1 is preceded by

               1. the definitions of elementtype and the function same,
               2. the definitions of LIST, position and END(L) as above,
               3. the definition of DELETE from Fig. 2.3, and
               4. suitable definitions for the trivial procedures FIRST, NEXT, and RETRIEVE,

          then a working procedure PURGE results.

             At first, it may seem tedious writing procedures to govern all accesses to the
          underlying structures. However, if we discipline ourselves to writing programs in
          terms of the operations for manipulating abstract data types rather than making use
          of particular implementation details, then we can modify programs more readily by
          reimplementing the operations rather than searching all programs for places where
          we have made accesses to the underlying data structures. This flexibility can be
          particularly important in large software efforts, and the reader should not judge the
          concept by the necessarily tiny examples found in this book.


          Pointer Implementation of Lists
          Our second implementation of lists, singly-linked cells, uses pointers to link
          successive list elements. This implementation frees us from using contiguous
          memory for storing a list and hence from shifting elements to make room for new
          elements or to close up gaps created by deleted elements. However, one price we pay
          is extra space for pointers.

              In this representation, a list is made up of cells, each cell consisting of an element
          of the list and a pointer to the next cell on the list. If the list is a1, a2, . . . , an, the cell
          holding ai has a pointer to the cell holding ai+1, for

             procedure INSERT ( x: elementtype; p: position; var L:
          LIST );
              { INSERT places x at position p in list L }
              var
                  q: position;
              begin
                  if L.last > = maxlength then
                      error('list is full')
                  else if (p > L.last + 1) or (p < 1) then
                      error('position does not exist')
                  else begin



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (6 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                      for q := L.last downto p do
                         { shift elements at p, p + 1, . . . down one position }
                         L.elements[q + 1 ]: = L.elements[q];
                      L.last := L.last + 1;
                      L.elements[p] := x
                   end
                 end; { INSERT }

              procedure DELETE ( p: position; var L: LIST );
               { DELETE removes the element at position p of list L }
               var
                 q: position;
               begin
                 if (p > L.last) or (p < 1) then
                    error('position does not exist')
                 else begin
                     L.last := L.last - 1;
                     for q := p to L.last do
                        { shift elements at p + 1, p + 2,... up one position }
                        L.elements[q] := L.elements[q + 1]
                 end
               end; { DELETE }

              function LOCATE ( x: elementtype; L: LIST ): position;
                { LOCATE returns the position of x on list L }
                var
                  q: position;
                begin
                  for q := 1 to L.last do
                     if L.elements[q] = x then
                         return (q);
                  return (L.last + 1) { if not found }
                end; { LOCATE }

                          Fig. 2.3. Array-based implementation of some list operations.

          i = 1, 2 , . . . , n-1. The cell holding an has a nil pointer. There is also a header cell
          that points to the cell holding a1; the header holds no element.† In the case of an
          empty list, the header's pointer is nil, and there are no other cells. Figure 2.4 shows a
          linked list of this form.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (7 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                                                      Fig. 2.4. A linked list.

             For singly-linked lists, it is convenient to use a definition of position that is
          somewhat different than the definition of position in an array implementation. Here,
          position i will be a pointer to the cell holding the pointer to ai for i = 2, 3 , . . . , n.
          Position 1 is a pointer to the header, and position END(L) is a pointer to the last cell
          of L.

              The type of a list happens to be the same as that of a position -- it is a pointer to a
          cell, the header in particular. We can formally define the essential parts of a linked
          list data structure as follows.

            type
              celltype = record
                 element: elementtype;
                 next: ↑ celltype
              end;
              LIST = ↑ celltype;
              position = ↑ celltype;

              The function END(L) is shown in Fig. 2.5. It works by moving pointer q down the
          list from the header, until it reaches the end, which is detected by the fact that q
          points to a cell with a nil pointer. Note that this implementation of END is
          inefficient, as it requires us to scan the entire list every time we need to compute
          END(L). If we need to do so frequently, as in the PURGE program of Fig. 2.1, we
          could either

               1. Use a representation of lists that includes a pointer to the last cell, or
               2. Replace uses of END(L) where possible. For example, the condition p <>
                  END(L) in line (2) of Fig. 2.1 could be replaced by p ↑.next <> nil, at a cost
                  of making that program dependent on one particular implementation of lists.

              function END ( L: LIST ): position;
                { END returns a pointer to the last cell of L }
                var
                  q: position;
                begin
          (1)      q := L;
          (2)      while q↑.next <> nil
          do
          (3)         q := q↑.next;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (8 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          (4)         return (q)
                    end; { END }

                                                  Fig. 2.5. The function END.

             Figure 2.6 contains routines for the four operations INSERT, DELETE,
          LOCATE, and MAKENULL using this pointer implementation of lists. The other
          operations can be implemented as one-step routines, with the exception of
          PREVIOUS, which requires a scan of the list from the beginning. We leave these
          other routines as exercises. Note that many of the commands do not use parameter L,
          the list, and we omit it from those that do not.

             The mechanics of the pointer manipulations of the INSERT procedure in Fig. 2.6
          are shown in Fig. 2.7. Figure 2.7(a) shows the situation before executing INSERT.
          We wish to insert a new element in front of the cell containing b, so p is a pointer to
          the list cell that contains the pointer to b. At line (1), temp is set to point to the cell
          containing b. At line (2) a new list cell is created and the next field of the cell
          containing a is made to point to this cell. At line (3) the element field of the newly-
          created cell is made to hold x, and at line (4) the next field is given the value of temp,
          thus making it point to the cell containing b. Figure 2.7(b) shows the result of
          executing INSERT. The new pointers are shown dashed, and marked with the step at
          which they were created.

             The DELETE procedure is simpler. Figure 2.8 shows the pointer manipulations of
          the DELETE procedure in Fig. 2.6. Old pointers are solid and the new pointers
          dashed.

             We should note that a position in a linked-list implementation of a list behaves
          differently from a position in an array implementation. Suppose we have a list with
          three elements a, b, c and a variable p, of type position, which currently has position
          3 as its value; i.e., it points to the cell holding b, and thus represents the position of c.
          If we execute a command to insert x at position 2, the list becomes a, x, b, c, and
          element b now occupies position 3. If we use the array implementation of lists
          described earlier, b and c would be moved down the array, so b would indeed occupy
          the third position.

              procedure INSERT ( x: elementtype; p: position);
               var
                  temp : position;
               begin
          (1)      temp := p ↑.next;
          (2)      new(p ↑.next );



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (9 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          (3)         p ↑.next ↑.element := x;
          (4)         p ↑.next ↑.next := temp
                   end; { INSERT }

                 procedure DELETE ( p: position );
                  begin
                     p ↑.next := p ↑.next ↑.next
                  end; { DELETE }

                 function LOCATE ( x: elementtype; L: LIST ): position;
                   var
                     p: position;
                   begin
                     p := L;
                     while p ↑.next <> nil
          do
                        if p ↑.next ↑.element = x then
                            return (p)
                        else
                            p := p ↑.next;
                     return (p) { if not found }
                   end; { LOCATE }

                 function MAKENULL ( var L: LIST ) : position;
                   begin
                      new(L);
                      L ↑.next := nil;
                      return (L )
                   end; { MAKENULL }

                         Fig. 2.6. Some operations using the linked-list implementation.

          However, if the linked-list implementation is used, the value of p, which is a pointer
          to the cell containing b, does not change because of the insertion, so afterward, the
          value of p is "position 4," not 3. This position variable must be updated, if it is to be
          used subsequently as the position of b.†




                                                Fig. 2.7. Diagram of INSERT.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (10 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                                                Fig. 2.8. Diagram of DELETE.


          Comparison of Methods
          We might wonder whether it is best to use a pointer-based or array-based
          implementation of lists in a given circumstance. Often the answer depends on which
          operations we intend to perform, or on which are performed most frequently. Other
          times, the decision rests on how long the list is likely to get. The principal issues to
          consider are the following.

               1. The array implementation requires us to specify the maximum size of a list at
                  compile time. If we cannot put a bound on the length to which the list will
                  grow, we should probably choose a pointer-based implementation.
               2. Certain operations take longer in one implementation than the other. For
                  example, INSERT and DELETE take a constant number of steps for a linked
                  list, but require time proportional to the number of following elements when
                  the array implementation is used. Conversely, executing PREVIOUS and
                  END require constant time with the array implementation, but time
                  proportional to the length of the list if pointers are used.
               3. If a program calls for insertions or deletions that affect the element at the
                  position denoted by some position variable, and the value of that variable will
                  be used later on, then the pointer representation cannot be used as we have
                  described it here. As a general principle, pointers should be used with great
                  care and restraint.
               4. The array implementation may waste space, since it uses the maximum
                  amount of space independent of the number of elements actually on the list at
                  any time. The pointer implementation uses only as much space as is needed
                  for the elements currently on the list, but requires space for the pointer in each
                  cell. Thus, either method could wind up using more space than the other in
                  differing circumstances.


          Cursor-Based Implementation of Lists
          Some languages, such as Fortran and Algol, do not have pointers. If we are working
          with such a language, we can simulate pointers with cursors, that is, with integers
          that indicate positions in arrays. For all the lists of elements whose type is
          elementtype, we create one array of records; each record consists of an element and



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (11 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          an integer that is used as a cursor. That is, we define

            var
              SPACE: array [1..maxlength] of record
                element: elementtype;
                next: integer
              end

          If L is a list of elements, we declare an integer variable say Lhead, as a header for L.
          We can treat Lhead as a cursor to a header cell in SPACE with an empty element
          field. The list operations can then be implemented as in the pointer-based
          implementation just described.

             Here, we shall describe an alternative implementation that avoids the use of
          header cells by making special cases of insertions and deletions at position 1. This
          same technique can also be used with pointer-based linked-lists to avoid the use of
          header cells. For a list L, the value of SPACE[Lhead].element is the first element of
          L. The value of SPACE[Lhead].next is the index of the cell containing the second
          element, and so on. A value of 0 in either Lhead or the field next indicates a "nil
          pointer"; that is, there is no element following.

             A list will have type integer, since the header is an integer variable that represents
          the list as a whole. Positions will also be of type integer. We adopt the convention
          that position i of list L is the index of the cell of SPACE holding element i-1 of L,
          since the next field of that cell will hold the cursor to element i. As a special case,
          position 1 of any list is represented by 0. Since the name of the list is always a
          parameter of operations that use positions, we can distinguish among the first
          positions of different lists. The position END(L) is the index of the last element on L.

             Figure 2.9 shows two lists, L = a, b, c and M = d, e, sharing the array SPACE,
          with maxlength = 10. Notice that all the cells of the array that are not on either list
          are linked on another list called available. This list is necessary so we can obtain an
          empty cell when we want to insert into some list, and so we can have a place to put
          deleted cells for later reuse.




                                   Fig. 2.9. A cursor implementation of linked lists.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (12 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




              To insert an element x into a list L we take the first cell in the available list and
          place it in the correct position of list L. Element x is then placed in the element field
          of this cell. To delete an element x from list L we remove the cell containing x from
          L and return it to the beginning of the available list. These two actions can be viewed
          as special cases of the act of taking a cell C pointed to by one cursor p and causing
          another cursor q to point to C, while making p point where C had pointed and
          making C point where q had pointed. Effectively, C is inserted between q and
          whatever q pointed to. For example, if we delete b from list L in Fig. 2.9, C is row 8
          of SPACE, p is SPACE[5].next, and q is available. The cursors before (solid) and
          after (dashed) this action are shown in Fig. 2.10, and the code is embodied in the
          function move of Fig. 2.11, which performs the move if C exists and returns false if
          C does not exist.

              Figure 2.12 shows the procedures INSERT and DELETE, and a procedure
          initialize that links the cells of the array SPACE into an available space list. These
          procedures omit checks for errors; the reader may insert them as an exercise. Other
          operations are left as exercises and are similar to those for pointer-based linked lists.




                                  Fig. 2.10. Moving a cell C from one list to another.

                 function move ( var p, q: integer ): boolean;
                   { move puts cell pointed to by p ahead of cell pointed to by q }
                   var
                     temp: integer;
                   begin
                     if p = 0 then begin { cell nonexistent }
                         writeln('cell does not exist');
                         return (false)
                     end
                     else begin
                         temp := q;
                         q := p;
                         p := SPACE[q ].next;
                         SPACE[q ].next := temp;
                         return (true)
                     end
                   end; { move }




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (13 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                                                Fig. 2.11. Code to move a cell.


          Doubly-Linked Lists
          In a number of applications we may wish to traverse a list both forwards and
          backwards efficiently. Or, given an element, we may wish to determine the
          preceding and following elements quickly. In such situations we might wish

               procedure INSERT ( x: elementtype; p: position; var L:
          LIST );
                  begin
                    if p = 0 then begin
                        { insert at first position }
                        if move(available, L) then
                           SPACE[L].element := x
                    end
                    else { insert at position other than first }
                        if move(available, SPACE[p].next)
          then
                           { cell for x now pointed to by SPACE[p].next }
                           SPACE[SPACE[p].next].element :=
          x
                  end; { INSERT }

                 procedure DELETE ( p: position; var L: LIST );
                   begin
                     if p = 0 then
                         move(L, available)
                     else
                         move(SPACE[p].next, available)
                   end; { DELETE }

                 procedure initialize;
                   { initialize links SPACE into one available list }
                   var
                      i: integer;
                   begin
                      for i := maxsize - 1 downto 1 do
                          SPACE[i].next := i + 1;
                      available := 1;
                      SPACE[maxsize].next := 0 { mark end of available list }
                   end; { initialize }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (14 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                              Fig. 2.12. Some procedures for cursor-based linked lists.

          to give each cell on a list a pointer to both the next and previous cells on the list, as
          suggested by the doubly-linked list in Fig. 2.13. Chapter 12 mentions some specific
          situations where doubly-linked lists are essential for efficiency.




                                                Fig. 2.13. A doubly linked list.

              Another important advantage of doubly linked lists is that we can use a pointer to
          the cell containing the ith element of a list to represent position i, rather than using
          the less natural pointer to the previous cell. The only price we pay for these features
          is the presence of an additional pointer in each cell, and somewhat lengthier
          procedures for some of the basic list operations. If we use pointers (rather than
          cursors), we may declare cells consisting of an element and two pointers by

            type
              celltype = record
               element: elementtype;
               next, previous: ↑ celltype
              end;
              position = ↑ celltype;

          A procedure for deleting an element at position p in a doubly-linked list is given in
          Fig. 2.14. Figure 2.15 shows the changes in pointers caused by Fig. 2.14, with old
          pointers drawn solid and new pointers drawn dashed, on the assumption that the
          deleted cell is neither first nor last.† We first locate the preceding cell using the
          previous field. We make the next field of this cell point to the cell following the one
          in position p. Then we make the previous field of this following cell point to the cell
          preceding the one in position p. The cell pointed to by p becomes useless and should
          be reused automatically by the Pascal run-time system if needed.

            procedure DELETE (var p: position );
               begin
                 if p↑.previous <> nil
          then
                      { deleted cell not the first }
                      p↑.previous↑.next: = p↑.next;
                 if p↑.next <> nil
          then



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (15 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                         { deleted cell not the last }
                         p↑.next↑.previous : = p↑.previous
                  end; { DELETE }

                                      Fig. 2.14. Deletion from a doubly linked list.




                            Fig. 2.15. Pointer changes for implementation of a deletion.


          2.3 Stacks
          A stack is a special kind of list in which all insertions and deletions take place at one
          end, called the top. Other names for a stack are "pushdown list," and "LIFO" or "last-
          in-first-out" list. The intuitive model of a stack is a pile of poker chips on a table,
          books on a floor, or dishes on a shelf, where it is only convenient to remove the top
          object on the pile or add a new one above the top. An abstract data type in the
          STACK family often includes the following five operations.

               1. MAKENULL(S). Make stack S be an empty stack. This operation is exactly
                  the same as for general lists.
               2. TOP(S). Return the element at the top of stack S. If, as is normal, we identify
                  the top of a stack with position 1, then TOP(S) can be written in terms of list
                  operations as RETRIEVE(FIRST(S), S).
               3. POP(S). Delete the top element of the stack, that is, DELETE(FIRST(S), S).
                  Sometimes it is convenient to implement POP as a function that returns the
                  element it has just popped, although we shall not do so here.
               4. PUSH(x, S). Insert the element x at the top of stack S. The old top element
                  becomes next-to-top, and so on. In terms of list primitives this operation is
                  INSERT(x, FIRST(S), S).
               5. EMPTY(S). Return true if S is an empty stack; return false otherwise.

          Example 2.2. Text editors always allow some character (for example, "backspace")
          to serve as an erase character, which has the effect of canceling the previous
          uncanceled character. For example, if '#' is the erase character, then the string
          abc#d##e is really the string ae. The first '#' cancels c, the second d, and the third b.

             Text editors also have a kill character, whose effect is to cancel all previous
          characters on the current line. For the purposes of this example, we shall use '@' as
          the kill character.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (16 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




             A text editor can process a line of text using a stack. The editor reads one
          character at a time. If the character read is neither the kill nor the erase character, it
          pushes the character onto the stack. If the character read is the erase character, the
          editor pops the stack, and if it is the kill character, the editor makes the stack empty.
          A program that executes these actions is shown in Fig. 2.16.

              procedure EDIT;
                 var
                    S: STACK;
                    c: char;
                 begin
                    MAKENULL(S);
                    while not eoln do begin
                         read(c);
                         if c = '#' then
                            POP(S)
                         else if c = '@' then
                            MAKENULL(S)
                         else { c is an ordinary character }
                            PUSH(c, S)
                    end;
                    print S in reverse order
                 end; { EDIT }

                       Fig. 2.16. Program to carry out effects of erase and kill characters.

              In this program, the type of STACK must be declared as a list of characters. The
          process of writing the stack in reverse order in the last line of the program is a bit
          tricky. Popping the stack one character at a time gets the line in reverse order. Some
          stack implementations, such as the array-based implementation to be discussed next,
          allow us to write a simple procedure to print the stack from the bottom. In general,
          however, to reverse a stack, we must pop each element and push it onto another
          stack; the characters can then be popped from the second stack and printed in the
          order they are popped.


          An Array Implementation of Stacks
          Every implementation of lists we have described works for stacks, since a stack with
          its operations is a special case of a list with its operations. The linked-list
          representation of a stack is easy, as PUSH and POP operate only on the header cell
          and the first cell on the list. In fact, headers can be pointers or cursors rather than


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (17 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          complete cells, since there is no notion of "position" for stacks, and thus no need to
          represent position 1 in a way analogous to other positions.

              However, the array-based implementation of lists we gave in Section 2.2 is not a
          particularly good one for stacks, as every PUSH or POP requires moving the entire
          list up or down, thus taking time proportional to the number of elements on the stack.
          A better arrangement for using an array takes account of the fact that insertions and
          deletions occur only at the top. We can anchor the bottom of the stack at the bottom
          (high-indexed end) of the array, and let the stack grow towards the top (low-indexed
          end) of the array. A cursor called top indicates the current position of the first stack
          element. This idea is shown in Fig. 2.17.




                                     Fig. 2.17. An array implementation of a stack.

            For this array-based implementation of stacks we define the abstract data type
          STACK by

            type
              STACK = record
               top: integer;
               elements: array[1..maxlength] of elementtype
              end;

          An instance of the stack consists of the sequence elements[top], elements[top+1] , . . .
          , elements[maxlength]. Note that if top = maxlength + 1, then the stack is empty.

              The five typical stack operations are implemented in Fig. 2.18. Note that for TOP
          to return an elementtype, that type must be legal as the result of a function. If not,
          TOP must be a procedure that modifies its second argument by assigning it the value
          TOP(S), or a function that returns a pointer to elementtype.

              procedure MAKENULL ( var S: STACK );
                 begin
                    S.top := maxlength + 1
                 end; { MAKENULL }

              function EMPTY ( S: STACK ): boolean;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (18 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                  begin
                     if S.top > maxlength then
                         return (true)
                     else
                         return (false)
                  end; { EMPTY }

              function TOP ( var S: STACK ) : elementtype;
                 begin
                    if EMPTY(S) then
                        error('stack is empty')
                    else
                         return(S.elements[S.top])
                 end; { TOP }

              procedure POP ( var S: STACK );
                 begin
                    if EMPTY(S) then
                        error('stack is empty')
                    else
                        S.top := S.top + 1
                 end; { POP }

              procedure PUSH ( x: elementtype; var S: STACK );
                 begin
                    if S.top = 1 then
                         error('stack is full')
                    else begin
                         S.top := S.top - 1;
                         S.elements[S.top]: = x
                    end
                 end; { PUSH }

                                                Fig. 2.18. Operations on stacks


          2.4 Queues
          A queue is another special kind of list, where items are inserted at one end (the rear)
          and deleted at the other end (the front). Another name for a queue is a "FIFO" or
          "first-in first-out" list. The operations for a queue are analogous to those for a stack,
          the substantial differences being that insertions go at the end of the list, rather than
          the beginning, and that traditional terminology for stacks and queues is different. We



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (19 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          shall use the following operations on queues.

               1. MAKENULL(Q) makes queue Q an empty list.
               2. FRONT(Q) is a function that returns the first element on queue Q.
                  FRONT(Q) can be written in terms of list operations as
                  RETRIEVE(FIRST(Q), Q).
               3. ENQUEUE(x, Q) inserts element x at the end of queue Q. In terms of list
                  operations, ENQUEUE(x, Q) is INSERT(x, END(Q), Q).
               4. DEQUEUE(Q) deletes the first element of Q; that is, DEQUEUE(Q) is
                  DELETE(FIRST(Q), Q).
               5. EMPTY(Q) returns true if and only if Q is an empty queue.


          A Pointer Implementation of Queues
          As for stacks, any list implementation is legal for queues. However, we can take
          advantage of the fact that insertions are only done at the rear to make ENQUEUE
          efficient. Instead of running down the list from beginning to end each time we wish
          to enqueue something, we can keep a pointer (or cursor) to the last element. As for
          all kinds of lists, we also keep a pointer to the front of the list; for queues that pointer
          is useful for executing FRONT and DEQUEUE commands. In Pascal, we shall use a
          dummy cell as a header and have the front pointer point to it. This convention allows
          us to handle an empty queue conveniently.

             Here we shall develop an implementation for queues that is based on Pascal
          pointers. The reader may develop a cursor-based implementation that is analogous,
          but we have available, in the case of queues, a better array-oriented representation
          than would be achieved by mimicking pointers with cursors directly. We shall
          discuss this so-called "circular array" implementation at the end of this section. To
          proceed with the pointer-based implementation, let us define cells as before:

            type
              celltype = record
               element: elementtype;
               next: ↑ celltype
              end;

          Then we can define a list to consist of pointers to the front and rear of the queue. The
          first cell on a queue is a header cell in which the element field is ignored. This
          convention, as mentioned above, allows a simple representation for an empty queue.
          We define:




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (20 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




            type
              QUEUE = record
                 front, rear: ↑ celltype
              end;

          Figure 2.19 shows programs for the five queue operations. In MAKENULL the first
          statement new(Q.front) allocates a variable of type celltype and assigns its address to
          Q.front. The second statement puts nil into the next field of that cell. The third
          statement makes the header both the first and last cell of the queue.

             The procedure DEQUEUE(Q) deletes the first element of Q by disconnecting the
          old header from the queue. The first element on the list becomes the new dummy
          header cell.

             Figure 2.20 shows the results created by the sequence of commands
          MAKENULL(Q), ENQUEUE(x, Q), ENQUEUE(y, Q), DEQUEUE(Q). Note that
          after dequeueing, the element x being in the element field of the header cell, is no
          longer considered part of the queue.


          A Circular Array Implementation of
          Queues
          The array representation of lists discussed in Section 2.2 can be used for queues, but
          it is not very efficient. True, with a pointer to the last element, we can execute
          ENQUEUE in a fixed number of steps, but DEQUEUE, which removes the first
          element, requires that the entire queue be moved up one position in the array. Thus
          DEQUEUE takes Ω(n) time if the queue has length n.

              To avoid this expense, we must take a different viewpoint. Think of an array as a
          circle, where the first position follows the last, as suggested in Fig. 2.21. The queue
          is found somewhere around the circle in consecutive positions,† with the rear of the
          queue somewhere clockwise from the front. To enqueue an element, we move the
          Q.rear pointer one position clockwise and write the element in that position. To
          dequeue, we simply move Q.front one position clockwise. Thus, the queue migrates
          in a clockwise direction as we enqueue and dequeue elements. Observe that the
          procedures ENQUEUE and DEQUEUE can be written to take some constant number
          of steps if the circular array model is used.

            There is one subtlety that comes up in the representation of Fig 2.21 and in any
          minor variation of that strategy (e.g., if Q.rear points one position clockwise of the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (21 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          last element, rather than to that element itself). The problem is that there is no way to
          tell an empty queue from one that occupies the entire circle, short of maintaining a
          bit that is true if and only if the queue is empty. If we are not willing to maintain this
          bit, we must prevent the queue from ever filling the entire array.

             To see why, suppose the queue of Fig. 2.21 had maxlength elements. Then Q.rear
          would point one position counterclockwise of Q.front. What if the queue were
          empty? To see how an empty queue is represented, let us first consider a queue of
          one element. Then Q.front and Q.rear point to the same position. If we dequeue the
          one element, Q.front moves one position

              procedure MAKENULL ( var Q: QUEUE );
                 begin
                   new(Q.front); { create header cell }
                   Q.front↑.next := nil;
                   Q.rear := Q.front { header is both first and last cell }
                 end; { MAKENULL }

              function EMPTY ( Q: QUEUE): boolean;
                 begin
                   if Q.front = Q.rear then
                      return (true)
                   else
                      return (false)
                 end; { EMPTY }

              function FRONT ( Q: QUEUE ): elementtype;
                 begin
                   if EMPTY(Q) then
                      error('queue is empty')
                   else
                      return (Q.front↑.next↑.element)
                 end; { FRONT }

             procedure ENQUEUE ( x: elementtype; var Q: QUEUE );
                 begin
                   new(Q.rear↑.next); { add new cell to
          rear of queue }
                   Q.rear: = Q.rear↑.next;
                   Q.rear↑.element := x;
                   Q.rear↑.next := nil
                 end; { ENQUEUE }




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (22 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:58:59]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




              procedure DEQUEUE ( var Q: QUEUE );
                 begin
                   if EMPTY(Q) then
                      error('queue is empty')
                   else
                      Q.front := Q.front↑.next
                 end; { DEQUEUE }

                                    Fig. 2.19. Implementation of queue commands.

          clockwise; forming an empty queue. Thus an empty queue has Q.rear one position
          counterclockwise of Q.front, which is exactly the same relative position as when the
          queue had maxlength elements. We thus see that even though the array has
          maxlength places, we cannot let the queue grow longer than maxlength-1, unless we
          introduce another mechanism to distinguish empty queues.




                                        Fig. 2.20. A sequence of queue operations.

             Let us now write the five queue commands using this representation for a queue.
          Formally, queues are defined by:

            type
              QUEUE = record
               element: array[1..maxlength] of elementtype;
               front, rear: integer
              end;

          The commands appear in Fig. 2.22. The function addone(i) adds one to position i in
          the circular sense.




                                    Fig. 2.21. A circular implementation of queues.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (23 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          2.5 Mappings
          A mapping or associative store is a function from elements of one type, called the
          domain type to elements of another (possibly the same) type, called the range type.
          We express the fact that the mapping M associates element r of range type rangetype
          with element d of domain type domaintype by M(d) = r.

             Certain mappings such as square(i) = i2 can be implemented easily as a Pascal
          function by giving an arithmetic expression or other simple means for calculating
          M(d) from d. However, for many mappings there is no apparent way to describe
          M(d) other than to store for each d the value of M(d). For example, to implement a
          payroll function that associates with each employee a weekly salary seems to require
          that we store the current salary for each employee. In the remainder of this section
          we describe a method of implementing functions such as the "payroll" function.

              Let us consider what operations we might wish to perform on a mapping M.
          Given an element d of some domain type, we may wish to obtain M(d) or know
          whether M(d) is defined (i.e., whether d is currently in the domain of M). Or we may
          wish to enter new elements into the current domain of M and state their associated
          range values. Alternatively, we might wish to change the value of M(d). We also
          need a way to initialize a mapping to the null mapping, the mapping whose domain
          is empty. These operations are summarized by the following three commands.

               1. MAKENULL(M). Make M be the null mapping.
               2. ASSIGN(M, d, r). Define M(d) to be r, whether or not M(d) was defined
                  previously.

                        function addone ( i: integer ): integer;
                           begin
                             return (( i mod maxlength ) + 1)
                           end; { addone }

                        procedure MAKENULL ( var Q: QUEUE );
                           begin
                             Q.front := 1;
                             Q.rear := maxlength
                           end; { MAKENULL }

                        function EMPTY ( var Q: QUEUE ): boolean;
                           begin
                             if addone(Q.rear) = Q.front then



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (24 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                                 return (true)
                               else
                                 return (false)
                             end; { EMPTY }

                        function FRONT ( var Q: QUEUE ): elementtype;
                          begin
                             if EMPTY(Q) then
                                error('queue is empty')
                             else
                                return (Q.elements[Q.front])
                          end; { FRONT }

                        procedure ENQUEUE ( x: elementtype; var Q: QUEUE );
                          begin
                             if addone (addone(Q.rear)) = Q.front then
                                error('queue is full')
                             else begin
                                Q.rear := addone(Q.rear);
                                Q.elements[Q.rear] := x
                             end
                          end; { ENQUEUE )

                        procedure DEQUEUE ( var Q: QUEUE );
                          begin
                             if EMPTY(Q) then
                                error('queue is empty')
                          else
                                Q.front := addone(Q.front)
                          end; { DEQUEUE }

                                            Fig. 2.22. Circular queque implementation.

               3. COMPUTE(M, d, r). Return true and set variable r to M(d) if the latter is
                  defined; return false otherwise.


          Array Implementation of Mappings
          Many times, the domain type of a mapping will be an elementary type that can be
          used as an index type of an array. In Pascal, the index types include all the finite
          subranges of integers, like 1..100 or 17..23, the type char and subranges of char like
          'A'..'Z', and enumerated types like (north, east, south, west). For example, a cipher-



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (25 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          breaking program might keep a mapping crypt, with 'A'..'Z' as both its domain type
          and its range type, such that crypt (plaintext) is the letter currently guessed to stand
          for the letter plaintext.

             Such mappings can be implemented simply by arrays, provided there is some
          range type value that can stand for "undefined." For example, the above mapping
          crypt might be defined to have range type char, rather than 'A'..'Z', and '?' could be
          used to denote "undefined."

             Suppose the domain and range types are domaintype and rangetype, and
          domaintype is a basic Pascal type. Then we can define the type MAPPING (strictly
          speaking, mapping from domaintype to rangetype) by the declaration

            type
              MAPPING = array[domaintype] of rangetype;

          On the assumption that "undefined" is a constant of rangetype, and that firstvalue and
          lastvalue are the first and last values in domaintype,† we can implement the three
          commands on mappings as in Fig. 2.23.


          List Implementations of Mappings
          There are many possible implementations of mappings with finite domains. For
          example, hash tables are an excellent choice in many situations, but one whose
          discussion we shall defer to Chapter 4. Any mapping with a finite domain can be
          represented by the list of pairs (d1, r1), (d2, r2), . . . , (dk, rk), where d1, d2, . . . , dk are
          all the current members of the domain, and ri is the value that the mapping associates
          with di, for i = 1, 2 , . . . ,k. We can then use any implementation of lists we choose
          for this list of pairs.

             To be precise, the abstract data type MAPPING can be implemented by lists of
          elementtype, if we define

            type
              elementtype = record
               domain: domaintype;
               range: rangetype
              end;

          and then define MAPPING as we would define type LIST (of elementtype) in



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (26 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




               procedure MAKENULL ( var M: MAPPING );
                 var
                    i: domaintype;
                 begin
                    for i := firstvalue to lastvalue do
                        M[i] := undefined
                 end; { MAKENULL }

               procedure ASSIGN ( var M: MAPPING;
                    d: domaintype; r: rangetype );
                 begin
                    M[d] := r
                 end; { ASSIGN }

               function COMPUTE ( var M: MAPPING;
                    d: domaintype; var r: rangetype ): boolean;
                 begin
                    if M[d] = undefined then
                       return (false)
                    else begin
                       r := M[d];
                       return (true)
                    end
                 end; { COMPUTE }

                                     Fig. 2.23. Array implementation of mappings.

          whatever implementation of lists we choose. The three mapping commands are
          defined in terms of commands on type LIST in Fig. 2.24.


          2.6 Stacks and Recursive Procedures
          One important application of stacks is in the implementation of recursive procedures
          in programming languages. The run-time organization for a programming language
          is the set of data structures used to represent the values of the program variables
          during program execution. Every language that, like Pascal, allows recursive
          procedures, uses a stack of activation records to record the values for all the
          variables belonging to each active procedure of a program. When a procedure P is
          called, a new activation record for P is placed on the stack, regardless of whether
          there is already another activation record for P on the stack. When P returns, its
          activation record must be on top of the stack, since P cannot return until all
          procedures it has called have returned to P. Thus, we may pop the activation record


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (27 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          for this call of P to cause control to return to the point at which P was called (that
          point, known as the return address, was placed in P's activation record when the call
          to P


            procedure MAKENULL ( var M: MAPPING );
              { same as for list }

            procedure ASSIGN ( var M: MAPPING;
                d: domaintype; r: rangetype );
              var
                x: elementtype; { the pair (d, r) }
                p: position; { used to go from first to last position on list M }
              begin
                x.domain := d;
                x.range := r;
                p := FIRST(M);
                while p <> END(M) do
                   if RETRIEVE(p, M).domain = d then
                      DELETE(p, M) { remove element with domain d }
                   else
                      p := NEXT(p, M);
                INSERT(x, FIRST(M), M) { put (d, r) at front of list }
              end; { ASSIGN }

            function COMPUTE ( var M: MAPPING;
                d: domaintype; var r: rangetype ): boolean;
              var
                p: position;
              begin
                p := FIRST(M);
                while p <> END(M) do begin
                   if RETRIEVE(p, M).domain = d then begin
                      r := RETRIEVE(p, M).range;
                      return (true)
                   end;
                   p := NEXT(p, M)
                end;
                return (false) { if d is not in domain }
              end; { COMPUTE }

                                 Fig. 2.24. Mapping implementation in terms of lists.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (28 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          was made).

              Recursion simplifies the structure of many programs. In some languages,
          however, procedure calls are much more costly than assignment statements, so a
          program may run faster by a large constant factor if we eliminate recursive procedure
          calls from it. We do not advocate that recursion or other procedure calls be
          eliminated habitually; most often the structural simplicity is well worth the running
          time. However, in the most frequently executed portions of programs, we may wish
          to eliminate recursion, and it is the purpose of this discussion to illustrate how
          recursive procedures can be converted to nonrecursive ones by the introduction of a
          user-defined stack.

          Example 2.3. Let us consider recursive and nonrecursive solutions to a simplified
          version of the classic knapsack problem in which we are given target t and a
          collection of positive integer weights w1, w2 , . . . , wn. We are asked to determine
          whether there is some selection from among the weights that totals exactly t. For
          example, if t = 10, and the weights are 7, 5, 4, 4, and 1, we could select the second,
          third, and fifth weights, since 5+4+ 1 = 10.

             The image that justifies the name "knapsack problem" is that we wish to carry on
          our back no more than t pounds, and we have a choice of items with given weights to
          carry. We presumably find the items' utility to be proportional to their weight,† so
          we wish to pack our knapsack as closely to the target weight as we can.

              In Fig. 2.25 we see a function knapsack that operates on an array

                     weights : array [l..n] of integer.

          A call to knapsack(s, i) determines whether there is a collection of the elements in
          weight[i] through weight[n] that sums to exactly s, and prints these weights if so. The
          first thing knapsack does is determine if it can respond immediately. Specifically, if s
          = 0, then the empty set of weights is a solution. If s < 0, there can be no solution, and
          if s > 0 and i > n, then we are out of weights to consider and therefore cannot find a
          sum equal to s.

              If none of these cases applies, then we simply call knapsack(s-wi, i + 1) to see if
          there is a solution that includes wi. If there is such a solution, then the total problem
          is solved, and the solution includes wi, so we print it. If there is no solution, then we
          call knapsack(s, i + 1) to see if there is a solution that does not use wi.


          Elimination of Tail Recursion

http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (29 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          Often, we can eliminate mechanically the last call a procedure makes to itself. If a
          procedure P(x) has, as its last step, a call to P(y), then we can replace the call to P(y)
          by an assignment x := y, followed by a jump to the beginning of the code for P. Here,
          y could be an expression, but x must be a parameter passed by value, so its value is
          stored in a location private to this call to P ‡ P could have more than one parameter,
          of course, and if so, they are each treated exactly as x and y above.

             This change works because rerunning P with the new value of x has exactly the
          same effect as calling P(y) and then returning from that call.

              function knapsack ( target: integer; candidate: integer ): boolean;
                begin
          (1)      if target = 0 then
          (2)          return (true)
          (3)      else if (target < 0) or (candidate > n) then
          (4)          return (false)
                  else { consider solutions with and without candidate }
          (5)      if knapsack(target - weights[candidate], candidate + 1)
          then
                     begin
          (6)            writeln(weights[candidate]);
          (7)            return (true)
                     end
                  else { only possible solution is without candidate }
          (8)          return (knapsack(target, candidate + 1))
                end; { knapsack }

                                          Fig. 2.25. Recursive knapsack solution.

          Notice that the fact that some of P's local variables have values the second time
          around is of no consequence. P could not use any of those values, or had we called
          P(y) as originally intended, the value used would not have been defined.

              Another variant of tail recursion is illustrated by Fig. 2.25, where the last step of
          the function knapsack just returns the result of calling itself with other parameters. In
          such a situation, again provided the parameters are passed by value (or by reference
          if the same parameter is passed to the call), we can replace the call by assignments to
          the parameters and a jump to the beginning of the function. In the case of Fig. 2.25,
          we can replace line (8) by

                        candidate:= candidate + 1;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (30 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                        goto beginning

          where beginning stands for a label to be assigned to statement (1). Note no change to
          target is needed, since it is passed intact as the first parameter. In fact, we could
          observe that since target has not changed, the tests of statements (1) and (3)
          involving target are destined to fail, and we could instead skip statements (1) and
          (2), test only for candidate > n at line (3), and proceed directly to line (5).


          Complete Recursion Elimination
          The tail recursion elimination procedure removes recursion completely only when
          the recursive call is at the end of the procedure, and the call has the correct form.
          There is a more general approach that converts any recursive procedure (or function)
          into a nonrecursive one, but this approach introduces a user-defined stack. In general,
          a cell of this stack will hold:

               1. The current values of the parameters of the procedure;
               2. The current values of any local variables of the procedure; and
               3. An indication of the return address, that is, the place to which control returns
                  when the current invocation of the procedure is done.

             In the case of the function knapsack, we can do something simpler. First, observe
          that whenever we make a call (push a record onto the stack), candidate increases by
          1. Thus, we can keep candidate as a global variable, incrementing it by one every
          time we push the stack and decreasing it by one when we pop.

             A second simplification we can make is to keep a modified "return address" on
          the stack. Strictly speaking, the return address for this function is either a place in
          some other procedure that calls knapsack, or the call at line (5), or the call at line (8).
          We can represent these three conditions by a "status," which has one of three values:

               1. none, indicating that the call is from outside the function knapsack,
               2. included, indicating the call at line (5), which includes weights[candidate] in
                  the solution, or
               3. excluded, indicating the call at line (8), which excludes weights[candidate].

             If we store this status symbol as the return address, then we can treat target as a
          global variable. When changing from status none to included, we subtract
          weights[candidate] from target, and we add it back in when changing from status
          included to excluded. To help represent the effect of the knapsack's return indicating
          whether a solution has been found, we use a global winflag. Once set to true, winflag



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (31 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          remains true and causes the stack to be popped and those weights with status
          included to be printed. With these modifications, we can declare our stack to be a list
          of statuses, by

                    type
                      statuses = (none, included, excluded);
                      STACK = { suitable declaration for stack of statuses }

          Figure 2.26 shows the resulting nonrecursive procedure knapsack operating on an
          array weights as before. Although this procedure may be faster than the original
          function knapsack, it is clearly longer and more difficult to understand. For this
          reason, recursion elimination should be used only when speed is very important.


          procedure knapsack ( target: integer );
            var
              candidate: integer;
              winflag: boolean;
              S: STACK;
            begin
              candidate := 1;
              winflag := false;
              MAKENULL(S);
              PUSH(none, S); { initialize stack to consider weights[1] }
              repeat
                 if winflag then begin
                    { pop stack, printing weights included in solution }
                    if TOP(S) = included then
                        writeln(weights[candidate]);
                    candidate := candidate - 1;
                    POP(S)
                 end
                 else if target = 0 then begin { solution found }
                    winflag := true;
                    candidate := candidate - 1;
                    POP(S)
                 end
                 else if (((target < 0) and (TOP(S) = none))
                       or (candidate > n)) then begin
                    { no solution possible with choices made }
                    candidate := candidate - 1;
                    POP(S)
                 end


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (32 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                  else { no resolution yet; consider status of current candidate }
                  if TOP(S) = none then begin { first try including candidate }
                     target := target - weights[candidate];
                     candidate := candidate + 1;
                     POP(S); PUSH(included, S); PUSH(none, S)
                  end
                  else if TOP(S) = included then begin { try excluding candidate }
                     target := target + weights[candidate];
                     candidate := candidate + 1;
                      POP(S); PUSH(excluded, S); PUSH(none, S)
                  end
                  else begin { TOP(S) = excluded; give up on current choice }
                      POP(S);
                      candidate := candidate - 1
                  end
               until EMPTY(S)
             end; { knapsack }

                                      Fig. 2.26. Nonrecursive knapsack procedure.


          Exercises

                        Write a program to print the elements on a list. Throughout these
                2.1
                        exercises use list operations to implement your programs.

                        Write programs to insert, delete, and locate an element on a sorted list
                        using

                             a. array,
                2.2
                             b. pointer, and
                             c. cursor implementations of lists.

                        What is the running time of each of your programs?

                        Write a program to merge

                2.3          a. two sorted lists,
                             b. n sorted lists.


                2.4     Write a program to concatenate a list of lists.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (33 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                        Suppose we wish to manipulate polynomials of the form p(x) = c1xe1 +
                        c2xe2 + . . . + cnxen, where e1 > e2 > . . . > en ≥ 0. Such a polynomial can
                2.5     be represented by a linked list in which each cell has three fields: one for
                        the coefficient ci, one for the exponent ei, and one for the pointer to the
                        next cell. Write a program to differentiate polynomials represented in this
                        manner.

                        Write programs to add and multiply polynomials of the form in Exercise
                2.6     2.5. What is the running time of your programs as a function of the
                        number of terms?

                        Suppose we declare cells by

                          type
                            celltype = record
                             bit: 0..1;
                             next: ↑ celltype
                            end;
              *2.7
                        A binary number b1b2 . . . bn, where each bi is 0 or 1, has numerical value

                                  . This number can be represented by the list b1, b2 , . . . , bn.
                        That list, in turn, can be represented as a linked list of cells of type
                        celltype. Write a procedure increment(bnumber) that adds one to the
                        binary number pointed to by bnumber. Hint: Make increment recursive.

                        Write a procedure to interchange the elements at positions p and
                2.8
                        NEXT(p) in a singly linked list.

                        The following procedure was intended to remove all occurrences of
                        element x from list L. Explain why it doesn't always work and suggest a
                        way to repair the procedure so it performs its intended task.

                          procedure delete ( x: elementtype; var L: LIST );
                            var
                              p: position;
                            begin
              *2.9
                              p := FIRST(L);
                              while p <> END(L) do begin
                                 if RETRIEVE(p, L) = x then
                                    DELETE(p, L);



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (34 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                                  p := NEXT(p, L)
                                end
                              end; { delete }


                        We wish to store a list in an array A whose cells consist of two fields,
                        data to store an element and position to give the (integer) position of the
                        element. An integer last indicates that A[1] through A[last] are used to
                        hold the list. The type LIST can be defined by

                          type
                            LIST = record
                              last: integer;
              2.10
                              elements: array[1..maxlength] of record
                                   data: elementtype;
                                   position: integer
                              end
                            end;

                        Write a procedure DELETE(p, L) to remove the element at position p.
                        Include all necessary error checks.

                        Suppose L is a LIST and p, q, and r are positions. As a function of n, the
                        length of list L, determine how many times the functions FIRST, END,
                        and NEXT are executed by the following program.

                          p := FIRST(L);
                          while p <> END(L) do begin
                             q := p;
                             while q <> END(L) do begin
                                q := NEXT(q, L);
              2.11
                                r := FIRST(L);
                                while r <> q do
                                   r := NEXT(r, L)
                             end;
                             p := NEXT(p, L)
                          end;




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (35 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                        Rewrite the code for the LIST operations assuming a linked list
              2.12      representation, but without a header cell. Assume true pointers are used
                        and position 1 is represented by nil.

              2.13      Add the necessary error checks in the procedure of Fig. 2.12.

                        Another array representation of lists is to insert as in Section 2.2, but
                        when deleting, simply replace the deleted element by a special value
                        "deleted," which we assume does not appear on lists otherwise. Rewrite
              2.14
                        the list operations to implement this strategy. What are the advantages
                        and disadvantages of the approach compared with our original array
                        representation of lists?

                        Suppose we wish to use an extra bit in queue records to indicate whether
                        a queue is empty. Modify the declarations and operations for a circular
              2.15
                        queue to accommodate this feature. Would you expect the change to be
                        worthwhile?

                        A dequeue (double-ended queue) is a list from which elements can be
              2.16      inserted or deleted at either end. Develop array, pointer, and cursor
                        implementations for a dequeue.

                        Define an ADT to support the operations ENQUEUE, DEQUEUE, and
              2.17      ONQUEUE. ONQUEUE(x) is a function returning true or false
                        depending on whether x is or is not on the queue.

                        How would one implement a queue if the elements that are to be placed
              2.18      on the queue are arbitrary length strings? How long does it take to
                        enqueue a string?

                        Another possible linked-list implementation of queues is to use no header
                        cell, and let front point directly to the first cell. If the queue is empty, let
                        front = rear = nil. Implement the queue operations for this
              2.19
                        representation. How does this implementation compare with the list
                        implementation given for queues in Section 2.4 in terms of speed, space
                        utilization, and conciseness of the code?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (36 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                        A variant of the circular queue records the position of the front element
                        and the length of the queue.

                             a. Is it necessary in this implementation to limit the length of a
              2.20              queue to maxlength - 1?
                             b. Write the five queue operations for this implementation.
                             c. Compare this implementation with the circular queue
                                implementation of Section 2.4.


                        It is possible to keep two stacks in a single array, if one grows from
                        position 1 of the array, and the other grows from the last position. Write a
              2.21      procedure PUSH(x, S) that pushes element x onto stack S, where S is one
                        or the other of these two stacks. Include all necessary error checks in
                        your procedure.

                        We can store k stacks in a single array if we use the data structure
                        suggested in Fig. 2.27, for the case k = 3. We push and pop from each
                        stack as suggested in connection with Fig. 2.17 in Section 2.3. However,
                        if pushing onto stack i causes TOP(i) to equal BOTTOM(i-1), we first
                        move all the stacks so that there is an appropriate size gap between each
                        adjacent pair of stacks. For example, we might make the gaps above all
                        stacks equal, or we might make the gap above stack i proportional to the
                        current size of stack i (on the theory that larger stacks are likely to grow
                        sooner, and we want to postpone as long as possible the next
                        reorganization).

                             a. On the assumption that there is a procedure reorganize to call
                                when stacks collide, write code for the five stack operations.
                             b. On the assumption that there is a procedure makenewtops that
                                computes newtop[i], the "appropriate" position for the top of stack
              2.22              i, for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, write the procedure reorganize. Hint. Note that
                                stack i could move up or down, and it is necessary to move stack i
                                before stack j if the new position of stack j overlaps the old
                                position of stack i. Consider stacks 1, 2 , . . . , k in order, but keep
                                a stack of "goals," each goal being to move a particular stack. If
                                on considering stack i, we can move it safely, do so, and then
                                reconsider the stack whose number is on top of the goal stack. If
                                we cannot safely move stack i, push i onto the goal stack.
                             c. What is an appropriate implementation for the goal stack in (b)?
                                Do we really need to keep it as a list of integers, or will a more
                                succinct representation do?



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (37 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                             d. Implement makenewtops in such a way that space above each
                                stack is proportional to the current size of that stack.
                             e. What modifications of Fig. 2.27 are needed to make the
                                implementation work for queues? For general lists?


                        Modify the implementations of POP and ENQUEUE in Sections 2.3 and
                        2.4 to return the element removed from the stack or queue. What
              2.23
                        modifications must be made if the element type is not a type that can be
                        returned by a function?

                        Use a stack to eliminate recursion from the following procedures.

                        a. function comb ( n, m: integer ): integer;
                             { computes (
                            ) assuming 0 ≤ m ≤ n and n
                        ≥1}
                            begin
                              if (n = 1) or (m = 0) or (m = n)
                        then
                                 return (1)
                              else
                                 return (comb(n-1, m) + comb(n-1, m-1))
                            end; { comb }




              2.24


                                                  Fig. 2.27. Many stacks in one array.

                        b. procedure reverse ( var L: LIST );
                            { reverse list L }
                            var
                              x: elementtype;
                            begin
                              if not EMPTY(L) then begin
                                 x := RETRIEVE(FIRST(L), L);
                                 DELETE(FIRST(L), L);


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (38 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




                                  reverse(L);
                                  INSERT(x, END(L), L)
                                end
                               end; { reverse }




                        Can we eliminate the tail recursion from the programs in Exercise 2.24?
            *2.25
                        If so, do it.


          Bibliographic Notes
          Knuth [1968] contains additional information on the implementation of lists, stacks,
          and queues. A number of programming languages, such as LISP and SNOBOL,
          support lists and strings in a convenient manner. See Sammet [1969], Nicholls
          [1975], Pratt [1975], or Wexelblat [1981] for a history and description of many of
          these languages.

          † Strictly speaking, the type is "LIST of elementtype." However, the
          implementations of lists we propose do not depend on what elementtype is; indeed, it
          is that independence that justifies the importance we place on the list concept. We
          shall use "LIST" rather than "LIST of elementtype," and similarly treat other ADT's
          that depend on the types of elements.

          † In this case, if we eliminate records that are "the same" we might wish to check
          that the names and addresses are also equal; if the account numbers are equal but the
          other fields are not, two people may have inadvertently gotten the same account
          number. More likely, however, is that the same subscriber appears on the list more
          than once with distinct account numbers and slightly different names and/or
          addresses. In such cases, it is difficult to eliminate all duplicates.

          † Even though L is not modified, we pass L by reference because frequently it will be
          a big structure and we don't want to waste time copying it.

          † Making the header a complete cell simplifies the implementation of list operation
          in Pascal. We can use pointers for headers if we are willing to implement our
          operations so they do insertions and deletions at the beginning of a list in a special
          way. See the discussion under cursor-based implementation of lists in this section.

          † Of course, there are many situations where we would like p to continue to


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (39 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 2: Basic Abstract DataTypes




          represent the position of c.

          † Incidentally, it is common practice to make the header of a doubly linked list be a
          cell that effectively "completes the circle." That is, the header's previous field points
          to the last cell and next points to the first cell. In this manner, we need not check for
          nil pointers in Fig. 2.14.

          † Note that "consecutive" must be taken in circular sense. That is, a queue of length
          four could occupy the last two and first two positions of the array, for example.

          † For example, firstvalue = 'A' and lastvalue = 'Z' if domaintype is 'A'..'Z'.

          † In the "real" knapsack problem, we are given utility values as well as weights and
          are asked to maximize the utility of the items carried, subject to a weight constraint.

          ‡ Alternatively, x could be passed by reference if y is x.

                                            Table of Contents           Go to Chapter 3




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1202.htm (40 of 40) [1.7.2001 18:59:00]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_1.gif [1.7.2001 18:59:08]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_2.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_2.gif [1.7.2001 18:59:34]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_3.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_3.gif [1.7.2001 18:59:42]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_4.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_4.gif [1.7.2001 18:59:47]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_5.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_5.gif [1.7.2001 18:59:58]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_9.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_9.gif [1.7.2001 19:00:09]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_10.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_10.gif [1.7.2001 19:00:21]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_11.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_11.gif [1.7.2001 19:00:32]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_12.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig1_12.gif [1.7.2001 19:00:35]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          Trees
          A tree imposes a hierarchical structure on a collection of items. Familiar examples of
          trees are genealogies and organization charts. Trees are used to help analyze
          electrical circuits and to represent the structure of mathematical formulas. Trees also
          arise naturally in many different areas of computer science. For example, trees are
          used to organize information in database systems and to represent the syntactic
          structure of source programs in compilers. Chapter 5 describes applications of trees
          in the representation of data. Throughout this book, we shall use many different
          variants of trees. In this chapter we introduce the basic definitions and present some
          of the more common tree operations. We then describe some of the more frequently
          used data structures for trees that can be used to support these operations efficiently.


          3.1 Basic Terminology
          A tree is a collection of elements called nodes, one of which is distinguished as a
          root, along with a relation ("parenthood") that places a hierarchical structure on the
          nodes. A node, like an element of a list, can be of whatever type we wish. We often
          depict a node as a letter, a string, or a number with a circle around it. Formally, a tree
          can be defined recursively in the following manner.

               1. A single node by itself is a tree. This node is also the root of the tree.
               2. Suppose n is a node and T1, T2, . . . , Tk are trees with roots n1, n2, . . . , nk,
                  respectively. We can construct a new tree by making n be the parent of nodes
                  n1, n2, . . . , nk. In this tree n is the root and T1, T2, . . . , Tk are the subtrees of
                  the root. Nodes n1, n2, . . . , nk are called the children of node n.

          Sometimes, it is convenient to include among trees the null tree, a "tree" with no
          nodes, which we shall represent by Λ.

          Example 3.1. Consider the table of contents of a book, as suggested by Fig. 3.1(a).
          This table of contents is a tree. We can redraw it in the manner shown in Fig. 3.1(b).
          The parent-child relationship is depicted by a line. Trees are normally drawn top-
          down as in Fig. 3.1(b), with the parent above the child.

             The root, the node called "Book," has three subtrees with roots corresponding to
          the chapters C1, C2, and C3. This relationship is represented by the lines downward



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (1 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          from Book to C1, C2, and C3. Book is the parent of C1, C2, and C3, and these three
          nodes are the children of Book.




                               Fig. 3.1. A table of contents and its tree representation.

             The third subtree, with root C3, is a tree of a single node, while the other two
          subtrees have a nontrivial structure. For example, the subtree with root C2 has three
          subtrees, corresponding to the sections s2.1, s2.2, and s2.3; the last two are one-node
          trees, while the first has two subtrees corresponding to the subsections s2.1.1 and
          s2.1.2.

             Example 3.1 is typical of one kind of data that is best represented as a tree. In this
          example, the parenthood relationship stands for containment; a parent node is
          comprised of its children, as Book is comprised of C1, C2, and C3. Throughout this
          book we shall encounter a variety of other relationships that can be represented by
          parenthood in trees.

             If n1, n2, . . . , nk is a sequence of nodes in a tree such that ni is the parent of ni+1
          for 1 ≤ i < k, then this sequence is called a path from node n1 to node nk. The length
          of a path is one less than the number of nodes in the path. Thus there is a path of
          length zero from every node to itself. For example, in Fig. 3.1 there is a path of
          length two, namely (C2, s2.1, s2.1.2) from C2 to s2.1.2.

             If there is a path from node a to node b, then a is an ancestor of b, and b is a
          descendant of a. For example, in Fig. 3.1, the ancestors of s2.1, are itself, C2, and
          Book, while its descendants are itself, s2.1.1, and s2.1.2. Notice that any node is both
          an ancestor and a descendant of itself.

              An ancestor or descendant of a node, other than the node itself, is called a proper
          ancestor or proper descendant, respectively. In a tree, the root is the only node with
          no proper ancestors. A node with no proper descendants is called a leaf. A subtree of
          a tree is a node, together with all its descendants.

             The height of a node in a tree is the length of a longest path from the node to a
          leaf. In Fig. 3.1 node C1 has height 1, node C2 height 2, and node C3 height 0. The
          height of a tree is the height of the root. The depth of a node is the length of the
          unique path from the root to that node.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (2 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          The Order of Nodes
          The children of a node are usually ordered from left-to-right. Thus the two trees of
          Fig. 3.2 are different because the two children of node a appear in a different order in
          the two trees. If we wish explicitly to ignore the order of children, we shall refer to a
          tree as an unordered tree.




                                           Fig. 3.2. Two distinct (ordered) trees.

             The "left-to-right" ordering of siblings (children of the same node) can be
          extended to compare any two nodes that are not related by the ancestor-descendant
          relationship. The relevant rule is that if a and b are siblings, and a is to the left of b,
          then all the descendants of a are to the left of all the descendants of b.

          Example 3.2. Consider the tree in Fig. 3.3. Node 8 is to the right of node 2, to the
          left of nodes 9, 6, 10, 4, and 7, and neither left nor right of its ancestors 1, 3, and 5.




                                                          Fig. 3.3. A tree.

             A simple rule, given a node n, for finding those nodes to its left and those to its
          right, is to draw the path from the root to n. All nodes branching off to the left of this
          path, and all descendants of such nodes, are to the left of n. All nodes and
          descendants of nodes branching off to the right are to the right of n.


          Preorder, Postorder, and Inorder
          There are several useful ways in which we can systematically order all nodes of a
          tree. The three most important orderings are called preorder, inorder and postorder;
          these orderings are defined recursively as follows.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (3 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                ● If a tree T is null, then the empty list is the preorder, inorder and postorder
                  listing of T.
                ● If T consists a single node, then that node by itself is the preorder, inorder,

                  and postorder listing of T.

          Otherwise, let T be a tree with root n and subtrees T1, T2, . . . , Tk, as suggested in
          Fig. 3.4.




                                                          Fig. 3.4. Tree T.

               1. The preorder listing (or preorder traversal) of the nodes of T is the root n of
                  T followed by the nodes of T1 in preorder, then the nodes of T2 in preorder,
                  and so on, up to the nodes of Tk in preorder.
               2. The inorder listing of the nodes of T is the nodes of T1 in inorder, followed by
                  node n, followed by the nodes of T2, . . . , Tk, each group of nodes in inorder.
               3. The postorder listing of the nodes of T is the nodes of T1 in postorder, then
                  the nodes of T2 in postorder, and so on, up to Tk, all followed by node n.

             Figure 3.5(a) shows a sketch of a procedure to list the nodes of a tree in preorder.
          To make it a postorder procedure, we simply reverse the order of steps (1) and (2).
          Figure 3.5(b) is a sketch of an inorder procedure. In each case, we produce the
          desired ordering of the tree by calling the appropriate procedure on the root of the
          tree.

          Example 3.3. Let us list the tree of Fig. 3.3 in preorder. We first list 1 and then call
          PREORDER on the first subtree of 1, the subtree with root 2. This subtree is a single
          node, so we simply list it. Then we proceed to the second subtree of 1, the tree rooted
          at 3. We list 3, and then call PREORDER on the first subtree of 3. That call results in
          listing 5, 8, and 9, in that order.


              procedure PREORDER ( n: node );
               begin
          (1)      list n;
          (2)      for each child c of n, if any, in order from the left do
                     PREORDER(c)
               end; { PREORDER }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (4 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                            (a) PREORDER procedure.


                 procedure INORDER ( n: node );
                  begin
                     if n is a leaf then
                        list n;
                     else begin
                        INORDER(leftmost child of n);
                        list n;
                        for each child c of n, except for the leftmost,
                           in order from the left do
                              INORDER(c)
                     end
                  end; { INORDER }

                             (b) INORDER procedure.

                                         Fig. 3.5. Recursive ordering procedures.

          Continuing in this manner, we obtain the complete preorder traversal of Fig. 3.3: 1,
          2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 6, 10, 4, 7.

             Similarly, by simulating Fig. 3.5(a) with the steps reversed, we can discover that
          the postorder of Fig. 3.3 is 2, 8, 9, 5, 10, 6, 3, 7, 4, 1. By simulating Fig. 3.5(b), we
          find that the inorder listing of Fig. 3.3 is 2, 1, 8, 5, 9, 3, 10, 6, 7, 4.

             A useful trick for producing the three node orderings is the following. Imagine we
          walk around the outside of the tree, starting at the root, moving counterclockwise,
          and staying as close to the tree as possible; the path we have in mind for Fig. 3.3 is
          shown in Fig. 3.6.

              For preorder, we list a node the first time we pass it. For postorder, we list a node
          the last time we pass it, as we move up to its parent. For inorder, we list a leaf the
          first time we pass it, but list an interior node the second time we pass it. For example,
          node 1 in Fig. 3.6 is passed the first time at the beginning, and the second time while
          passing through the "bay" between nodes 2 and 3. Note that the order of the leaves in
          the three orderings is




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (5 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                                                   Fig. 3.6. Traversal of a tree.

          always the same left-to-right ordering of the leaves. It is only the ordering of the
          interior nodes and their relationship to the leaves that vary among the three.


          Labeled Trees and Expression Trees
          Often it is useful to associate a label, or value, with each node of a tree, in the same
          spirit with which we associated a value with a list element in the previous chapter.
          That is, the label of a node is not the name of the node, but a value that is "stored" at
          the node. In some applications we shall even change the label of a node, while the
          name of a node remains the same. A useful analogy is tree:list = label:element =
          node:position.

          Example 3.4. Figure 3.7 shows a labeled tree representing the arithmetic expression
          (a+b) * (a+c), where n1, . . . , n7 are the names of the nodes, and the labels, by
          convention, are shown next to the nodes. The rules whereby a labeled tree represents
          an expression are as follows:

               1. Every leaf is labeled by an operand and consists of that operand alone. For
                  example, node n4 represents the expression a.
               2. Every interior node n is labeled by an operator. Suppose n is labeled by a
                  binary operator θ, such as + or *, and that the left child represents expression
                  E1 and the right child E2. Then n represents expression (E1) θ (E2). We may
                  remove the parentheses if they are not necessary.

             For example, node n2 has operator +, and its left and right children represent the
          expressions a and b, respectively. Therefore, n2 represents (a)+(b), or just a+b. Node
          n1 represents (a+b)*(a+c), since * is the label at n1, and a+b and a+c are the
          expressions represented by n2 and n3, respectively.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (6 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                                            Fig. 3.7. Expression tree with labels.

              Often, when we produce the preorder, inorder, or postorder listing of a tree, we
          prefer to list not the node names, but rather the labels. In the case of an expression
          tree, the preorder listing of the labels gives us what is known as the prefix form of an
          expression, where the operator precedes its left operand and its right operand. To be
          precise, the prefix expression for a single operand a is a itself. The prefix expression
          for (E1) θ (E2), with θ a binary operator, is θP1P2, where P1 and P2 are the prefix
          expressions for E1 and E2. Note that no parentheses are necessary in the prefix
          expression, since we can scan the prefix expression θP1P2 and uniquely identify P1
          as the shortest (and only) prefix of P1P2 that is a legal prefix expression.

             For example, the preorder listing of the labels of Fig. 3.7 is *+ab+ac. The prefix
          expression for n2, which is +ab, is the shortest legal prefix of +ab+ac.

             Similarly, a postorder listing of the labels of an expression tree gives us what is
          known as the postfix (or Polish) representation of an expression. The expression (E1)
          θ (E2) is represented by the postfix expression P1P2θ, where P1 and P2 are the
          postfix representations of E1 and E2, respectively. Again, no parentheses are
          necessary in the postfix representation, as we can deduce what P2 is by looking for
          the shortest suffix of P1P2 that is a legal postfix expression. For example, the postfix
          expression for Fig. 3.7 is ab+ac+*. If we write this expression as P1P2*, then P2 is
          ac+, the shortest suffix of ab+ac+ that is a legal postfix expression.

             The inorder traversal of an expression tree gives the infix expression itself, but
          with no parentheses. For example, the inorder listing of the labels of Fig. 3.7 is a+b *
          a+c. The reader is invited to provide an algorithm for traversing an expression tree
          and producing an infix expression with all needed pairs of parentheses.


          Computing Ancestral Information
          The preorder and postorder traversals of a tree are useful in obtaining ancestral
          information. Suppose postorder(n) is the position of node n in a post-order listing of
          the nodes of a tree. Suppose desc(n) is the number of proper descendants of node n.


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (7 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          For example, in the tree of Fig. 3.7 the postorder numbers of nodes n2, n4, and n5 are
          3, 1, and 2, respectively.

             The postorder numbers assigned to the nodes have the useful property that the
          nodes in the subtree with root n are numbered consecutively from postorder(n) -
          desc(n) to postorder(n). To test if a vertex x is a descendant of vertex y, all we need
          do is determine whether

                                 postorder(y) - desc(y) ≤ postorder(x) ≤ postorder(y).

          A similar property holds for preorder.


          3.2 The ADT TREE
          In Chapter 2, lists, stacks, queues, and mappings were treated as abstract data types
          (ADT's). In this chapter trees will be treated both as ADT's and as data structures.
          One of our most important uses of trees occurs in the design of implementations for
          the various ADT's we study. For example, in Section 5.1, we shall see how a "binary
          search tree" can be used to implement abstract data types based on the mathematical
          model of a set, together with operations such as INSERT, DELETE, and MEMBER
          (to test whether an element is in a set). The next two chapters present a number of
          other tree implementations of various ADT's.

             In this section, we shall present several useful operations on trees and show how
          tree algorithms can be designed in terms of these operations. As with lists, there are a
          great variety of operations that can be performed on trees. Here, we shall consider
          the following operations:

               1. PARENT(n, T). This function returns the parent of node n in tree T. If n is the
                  root, which has no parent, Λ is returned. In this context, Λ is a "null node,"
                  which is used as a signal that we have navigated off the tree.
               2. LEFTMOST_CHILD(n, T) returns the leftmost child of node n in tree T, and
                  it returns Λ if n is a leaf, which therefore has no children.
               3. RIGHT_SIBLING(n, T) returns the right sibling of node n in tree T, defined
                  to be that node m with the same parent p as n such that m lies immediately to
                  the right of n in the ordering of the children of p. For example, for the tree in
                  Fig. 3.7, LEFTMOST_CHILD(n2) = n4; RIGHT_SIBLING(n4) = n5, and
                  RIGHT_SIBLING (n5) = Λ.
               4. LABEL(n, T) returns the label of node n in tree T. We do not, however,
                  require labels to be defined for every tree.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (8 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




               5. CREATEi(v, T1, T2, . . . , Ti) is one of an infinite family of functions, one for
                  each value of i = 0, 1, 2, . . .. CREATEi makes a new node r with label v and
                  gives it i children, which are the roots of trees T1, T2, . . . , Ti, in order from
                  the left. The tree with root r is returned. Note that if i = 0, then r is both a leaf
                  and the root.
               6. ROOT(T) returns the node that is the root of tree T, or Λ if T is the null tree.
               7. MAKENULL(T) makes T be the null tree.

          Example 3.5. Let us write both recursive and nonrecursive procedures to take a tree
          and list the labels of its nodes in preorder. We assume that there are data types node
          and TREE already defined for us, and that the data type TREE is for trees with labels
          of the type labeltype. Figure 3.8 shows a recursive procedure that, given node n, lists
          the labels of the subtree rooted at n in preorder. We call PREORDER(ROOT(T)) to
          get a preorder listing of tree T.


              procedure PREORDER ( n: node );
                { list the labels of the descendants of n in preorder }
                var
                     c: node;
                begin
                     print(LABEL(n, T));
                     c := LEFTMOST_CHILD(n, T);
                     while c <> Λ do
          begin
                        PREORDER(c);
                        c := RIGHT_SIBLING(c, T)
                     end
                end; { PREORDER }


                                    Fig. 3.8. A recursive preorder listing procedure.

             We shall also develop a nonrecursive procedure to print a tree in preorder. To find
          our way around the tree, we shall use a stack S, whose type STACK is really "stack
          of nodes." The basic idea underlying our algorithm is that when we are at a node n,
          the stack will hold the path from the root to n, with the root at the bottom of the stack
          and node n at the top.†

             One way to perform a nonrecursive preorder traversal of a tree is given by the
          program NPREORDER shown in Fig. 3.9. This program has two modes of
          operation. In the first mode it descends down the leftmost unexplored path in the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (9 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          tree, printing and stacking the nodes along the path, until it reaches a leaf.

             The program then enters the second mode of operation in which it retreats back
          up the stacked path, popping the nodes of the path off the stack, until it encounters a
          node on the path with a right sibling. The program then reverts back to the first mode
          of operation, starting the descent from that unexplored right sibling.

             The program begins in mode one at the root and terminates when the stack
          becomes empty. The complete program is shown in Fig. 3.9.


          3.3 Implementations of Trees
          In this section we shall present several basic implementations for trees and discuss
          their capabilities for supporting the various tree operations introduced in Section 3.2.


          An Array Representation of Trees
          Let T be a tree in which the nodes are named 1, 2, . . . , n. Perhaps the simplest
          representation of T that supports the PARENT operation is a linear array A in which
          entry A[i] is a pointer or a cursor to the parent of node i. The root of T can be
          distinguished by giving it a null pointer or a pointer to itself as parent. In Pascal,
          pointers to array elements are not feasible, so we shall have to use a cursor scheme
          where A[i] = j if node j is the parent of node i, and A[i] = 0 if node i is the root.

              This representation uses the property of trees that each node has a unique parent.
          With this representation the parent of a node can be found in constant time. A path
          going up the tree, that is, from node to parent to parent, and so on, can be traversed
          in time proportional to the number of nodes on the path. We can also support the
          LABEL operator by adding another array L, such that L[i] is the label of node i, or by
          making the elements of array A be records consisting of an integer (cursor) and a
          label.

          Example 3.6. The tree of Fig. 3.10(a) has the parent representation given by the
          array A shown in Fig. 3.10(b).

              The parent pointer representation does not facilitate operations that require child-
          of information. Given a node n, it is expensive to determine the children of n, or the
          height of n. In addition, the parent pointer representation does not specify the order
          of the children of a node. Thus, operations like LEFTMOST_CHILD and
          RIGHT_SIBLING are not well defined. We could impose an artificial order, for



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (10 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          example, by numbering the children of each node after numbering the parent, and
          numbering the children in


                 procedure NPREORDER ( T: TREE );
                   { nonrecursive preorder traversal of tree T }

                    var
                      m: node; { a temporary }
                      S: STACK; { stack of nodes holding path from the root
                         to the parent TOP(S) of the "current" node m }

                    begin
                      { initialize }
                      MAKENULL(S);
                      m := ROOT(T);

                     while true do
                        if m < > Λ then begin
                            print(LABEL(m, T));
                            PUSH(m, S);
                            { explore leftmost child of m }
                            m := LEFTMOST_CHILD(m, T)
                     end
                     else begin
                         { exploration of path on stack
                             is now complete }
                         if EMPTY(S) then
                             return;
                         { explore right sibling of node
                             on top of stack }
                         m := RIGHT_SIBLING(TOP(S), T);
                         POP(S)
                      end
                   end; { NPREORDER }

                                      Fig. 3.9. A nonrecursive preorder procedure.

          increasing order from left to right. On that assumption, we have written the function
          RIGHT_SIBLING in Fig. 3.11, for types node and TREE that are defined as follows:


                 type



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (11 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                    node = integer;
                    TREE = array [1..maxnodes] of node;


          For this implementation we assume the null node Λ is represented by 0.




                                Fig. 3.10. A tree and its parent pointer representation.


                 function RIGHT_SIBLING ( n: node; T: TREE ): node;
                   { return the right sibling of node n in tree T }
                   var
                       i, parent: node;
                   begin
                      parent: = T[n];
                      for i := n + 1 to maxnodes do
                          { search for node after n with same parent }
                          if T[i] = parent then
                              return (i);
                          return (0) { null node will be returned
                             if no right sibling is ever found }
                   end; { RIGHT_SIBLING }

                           Fig. 3.11. Right sibling operation using array representation.


          Representation of Trees by Lists of
          Children
          An important and useful way of representing trees is to form for each node a list of
          its children. The lists can be represented by any of the methods suggested in Chapter
          2, but because the number of children each node may have can be variable, the
          linked-list representations are often more appropriate.

             Figure 3.12 suggests how the tree of Fig. 3.10(a) might be represented. There is
          an array of header cells, indexed by nodes, which we assume to be numbered 1, 2, . .



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (12 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          . , 10. Each header points to a linked list of "elements," which are nodes. The
          elements on the list headed by header[i] are the children of node i; for example, 9
          and 10 are the children of 3.




                                    Fig. 3.12. A linked-list representation of a tree.

             Let us first develop the data structures we need in terms of an abstract data type
          LIST (of nodes), and then give a particular implementation of lists and see how the
          abstractions fit together. Later, we shall see some of the simplifications we can
          make. We begin with the following type declarations:


              type
                node = integer;
                LIST = { appropriate definition for list of nodes };
                position = { appropriate definition for positions in lists };
                TREE = record
                 header: array [1..maxnodes] of LIST;
                 labels: array [1..maxnodes] of labeltype;
                 root: node
                end;


          We assume that the root of each tree is stored explicitly in the root field. Also, 0 is
          used to represent the null node.

             Figure 3.13 shows the code for the LEFTMOST_CHILD operation. The reader
          should write the code for the other operations as exercises.


                 function LEFTMOST_CHILD ( n: node; T: TREE ): node;
                   { returns the leftmost child of node n of tree T }
                   var
                      L: LIST; { shorthand for the list of n's children }
                   begin
                      L := T.header[n];
                      if EMPTY(L) then { n is a leaf }
                         return (0)



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (13 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                      else
                         return (RETRIEVE(FIRST(L), L))
                    end; { LEFTMOST_CHILD }

                                        Fig. 3.13. Function to find leftmost child.

             Now let us choose a particular implementation of lists, in which both LIST and
          position are integers, used as cursors into an array cellspace of records:


                 var
                   cellspace : array [1..maxnodes] of record
                      node: integer;
                      next: integer
                   end;


          To simplify, we shall not insist that lists of children have header cells. Rather, we
          shall let T.header [n] point directly to the first cell of the list, as is suggested by Fig.
          3.12. Figure 3.14(a) shows the function LEFTMOST_CHILD of Fig. 3.13 rewritten
          for this specific implementation. Figure 3.14(b) shows the operator PARENT, which
          is more difficult to write using this representation of lists, since a search of all lists is
          required to determine on which list a given node appears.


          The Leftmost-Child, Right-Sibling
          Representation
          The data structure described above has, among other shortcomings, the inability to
          create large trees from smaller ones, using the CREATEi operators. The reason is
          that, while all trees share cellspace for linked lists of children, each has its own array
          of headers for its nodes. For example, to implement CREATE2(v, T1, T2) we would
          have to copy T1 and T2 into a third tree and add a new node with label v and two
          children -- the roots of T1 and T2.

             If we wish to build trees from smaller ones, it is best that the representation of
          nodes from all trees share one area. The logical extension of Fig. 3.12 is to replace
          the header array by an array nodespace consisting of records with


                 function LEFTMOST_CHILD ( n: node; T: TREE ): node;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (14 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                    { returns the leftmost child of node n on tree T }
                    var
                        L: integer; { a cursor to the beginning of the list of n's children }
                    begin
                       L := T.header[n];
                       if L = 0 then { n is a leaf }
                          return (0)
                       else
                          return (cellspace[L].node)
                    end; { LEFTMOST_CHILD }

                         (a) The function LEFTMOST_CHILD.

                 function PARENT ( n: node; T: TREE ): node;
                   { returns the parent of node n in tree T }
                   var
                      p: node; { runs through possible parents of n }
                      i: position; { runs down list of p's children }
                   begin
                      for p := 1 to maxnodes do begin
                         i := T.header[p];
                         while i <> 0 do { see if n is among children of
          p}
                               if cellspace[i].node = n then
                                   return (p)
                               else
                                   i := cellspace[i].next
                      end;
                      return (0) { return null node if parent not found }
                    end; { PARENT }

                             (b) The function PARENT.

                        Fig. 3.14. Two functions using linked-list representation of trees.

          two fields label and header. This array will hold headers for all nodes of all trees.
          Thus, we declare


                 var
                   nodespace : array [1..maxnodes] of record
                     label: labeltype;
                     header: integer; { cursor to cellspace }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (15 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                    end;


          Then, since nodes are no longer named 1, 2, . . . , n, but are represented by arbitrary
          indices in nodespace, it is no longer feasible for the field node of cellspace to
          represent the "number" of a node; rather, node is now a cursor into nodespace,
          indicating the position of that node. The type TREE is simply a cursor into
          nodespace, indicating the position of the root.

          Example 3.7. Figure 3.15(a) shows a tree, and Fig. 3.15(b) shows the data structure
          where we have placed the nodes labeled A, B, C, and D arbitrarily in positions 10, 5,
          11, and 2 of nodespace. We have also made arbitrary choices for the cells of
          cellspace used for lists of children.




                                    Fig. 3.15. Another linked-list structure for trees.

             The structure of Fig. 3.15(b) is adequate to merge trees by the CREATEi
          operations. This data structure can be significantly simplified, however, First,
          observe that the chains of next pointers in cellspace are really right-sibling pointers.

             Using these pointers, we can obtain leftmost children as follows. Suppose
          cellspace[i].node = n. (Recall that the "name" of a node, as opposed to its label, is in
          effect its index in nodespace, which is what cellspace[i].node gives us.) Then
          nodespace[n].header indicates the cell for the leftmost child of n in cellspace, in the
          sense that the node field of that cell is the name of that node in nodespace.

             We can simplify matters if we identify a node not with its index in nodespace, but
          with the index of the cell in cellspace that represents it as a child. Then, the next
          pointers of cellspace truly point to right siblings, and the information contained in
          the nodespace array can be held by introducing a field leftmost_child in cellspace.
          The datatype TREE becomes an integer used as a cursor to cellspace indicating the
          root of the tree. We declare cellspace to have the following structure.


                 var
                   cellspace : array [1..maxnodes] of record
                      label: labeltype;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (16 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                      leftmost_child: integer;
                      right_sibling: integer;
                    end;


          Example 3.8. The tree of Fig. 3.15(a) is represented in our new data structure in Fig.
          3.16. The same arbitrary indices as in Fig. 3.15(b) have been used for the nodes.




                         Fig. 3.16. Leftmost-child, right-sibling representation of a tree.

             All operations but PARENT are straightforward to implement in the leftmost-
          child, right-sibling representation. PARENT requires searching the entire cellspace.
          If we need to perform the PARENT operation efficiently, we can add a fourth field to
          cellspace to indicate the parent of a node directly.

              As an example of a tree operation written to use the leftmost- child, right-sibling
          structure as in Fig. 3.16, we give the function CREATE2 in Fig. 3.17. We assume
          that unused cells are linked in an available space list, headed by avail, and that
          available cells are linked by their right-sibling fields. Figure 3.18 shows the old
          (solid) and the new (dashed) pointers.


                 function CREATE2 ( v: labeltype; T1, T2: integer ): integer;
                   { returns new tree with root v, having T1 and T2 as subtrees }
                   var
                      temp: integer; { holds index of first available cell
                        for root of new tree }
                   begin
                      temp := avail;
                      avail := cellspace [avail].right_sibling;
                      cellspace[temp].leftmost_child := T1;
                      cellspace[temp].label := v;
                      cellspace[temp].right_sibling := 0;
                      cellspace[T1].right_sibling := T2;
                      cellspace[T2].right_sibling := 0; { not necessary;
                         that field should be 0 as the cell was formerly a root }
                      return (temp)



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (17 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                    end; { CREATE2 }

                                             Fig. 3.17. The function CREATE2.




                                 Fig. 3.18. Pointer changes produced by CREATE2.

              Alternatively, we can use less space but more time if we put in the right-sibling
          field of the rightmost child a pointer to the parent, in place of the null pointer that
          would otherwise be there. To avoid confusion, we need a bit in every cell indicating
          whether the right-sibling field holds a pointer to the right sibling or to the parent.

             Given a node, we find its parent by following right-sibling pointers until we find
          one that is a parent pointer. Since all siblings have the same parent, we thereby find
          our way to the parent of the node we started from. The time required to find a node's
          parent in this representation depends on the number of siblings a node has.


          3.4 Binary Trees
          The tree we defined in Section 3.1 is sometimes called an ordered, oriented tree
          because the children of each node are ordered from left-to-right, and because there is
          an oriented path (path in a particular direction) from every node to its descendants.
          Another useful, and quite different, notion of "tree" is the binary tree, which is either
          an empty tree, or a tree in which every node has either no children, a left child, a
          right child, or both a left and a right child. The fact that each child in a binary tree is
          designated as a left child or as a right child makes a binary tree different from the
          ordered, oriented tree of Section 3.1.

          Example 3.9. If we adopt the convention that left children are drawn extending to
          the left, and right children to the right, then Fig. 3.19 (a) and (b) represent two
          different binary trees, even though both "look like" the ordinary (ordered, oriented)
          tree of Fig. 3.20. However, let us emphasize that Fig. 3.19(a) and (b) are not the
          same binary tree, nor are either in any sense equal to Fig. 3.20, for the simple reason
          that binary trees are not directly comparable with ordinary trees. For example, in Fig.
          3.19(a), 2 is the left child of 1, and 1 has no right child, while in Fig. 3.19(b), 1 has
          no left child but has 2 as a right child. In either binary tree, 3 is the left child of 2,
          and 4 is 2's right child.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (18 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




              The preorder and postorder listings of a binary tree are similar to those of an
          ordinary tree given on p. 78. The inorder listing of the nodes of a binary tree with
          root n, left subtree T1 and right subtree T2 is the inorder listing of T1 followed by n
          followed by the inorder listing of T2. For example, 35241 is the inorder listing of the
          nodes of Fig. 3.19(a).


          Representing Binary Trees
          A convenient data structure for representing a binary tree is to name the nodes 1, 2, .
          . . , n, and to use an array of records declared


                 var
                   cellspace : array [1..maxnodes] of record
                      leftchild: integer;
                      rightchild: integer;
                   end;




                                                   Fig. 3.19. Two binary trees.




                                                   Fig. 3.20. An "ordinary" tree.

          The intention is that cellspace[i].leftchild is the left child of node i, and rightchild is
          analogous. A value of 0 in either field indicates the absence of a child.

          Example 3.10. The binary tree of Fig. 3.19(a) can be represented as shown in Fig.
          3.21.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (19 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          An Example: Huffman Codes
          Let us give an example of how binary trees can be used as a data structure. The
          particular problem we shall consider is the construction of "Huffman codes."
          Suppose we have messages consisting of sequences of characters. In each message,
          the characters are independent and appear with a known




                                        Fig. 3.21. Representation of a binary tree.

          probability in any given position; the probabilities are the same for all positions. As
          an example, suppose we have a message made from the five characters a, b, c, d, e,
          which appear with probabilities .12, .4, .15, .08, .25, respectively.

              We wish to encode each character into a sequence of 0's and 1's so that no code
          for a character is the prefix of the code for any other character. This prefix property
          allows us to decode a string of 0's and 1's by repeatedly deleting prefixes of the string
          that are codes for characters.

          Example 3.11. Figure 3.22 shows two possible codes for our five symbol alphabet.
          Clearly Code 1 has the prefix property, since no sequence of three bits can be the
          prefix of another sequence of three bits. The decoding algorithm for Code 1 is
          simple. Just "grab" three bits at a time and translate each group of three into a
          character. Of course, sequences 101, 110, and 111 are impossible, if the string of bits
          really codes characters according to Code 1. For example, if we receive 001010011
          we know the original message was bcd.




                                                   Fig. 3.22. Two binary codes.

              It is easy to check that Code 2 also has the prefix property. We can decode a
          string of bits by repeatedly "grabbing" prefixes that are codes for characters and
          removing them, just as we did for Code 1. The only difference is that here, we cannot
          slice up the entire sequence of bits at once, because whether we take two or three bits



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (20 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          for a character depends on the bits. For example, if a string begins 1101001, we can
          again be sure that the characters coded were bcd. The first two bits, 11, must have
          come from b, so we can remove them and worry about 01001. We then deduce that
          the bits 01 came from c, and so on.

             The problem we face is: given a set of characters and their probabilities, find a
          code with the prefix property such that the average length of a code for a character is
          a minimum. The reason we want to minimize the average code length is to compress
          the length of an average message. The shorter the average code for a character is, the
          shorter the length of the encoded message. For example, Code 1 has an average code
          length of 3. This is obtained by multiplying the length of the code for each symbol
          by the probability of occurrence of that symbol. Code 2 has an average length of 2.2,
          since symbols a and d, which together appear 20% of the time, have codes of length
          three, and the other symbols have codes of length two.

             Can we do better than Code 2? A complete answer to this question is to exhibit a
          code with the prefix property having an average length of 2.15. This is the best
          possible code for these probabilities of symbol occurrences. One technique for
          finding optimal prefix codes is called Huffman's algorithm. It works by selecting two
          characters a and b having the lowest probabilities and replacing them with a single
          (imaginary) character, say x, whose probability of occurrence is the sum of the
          probabilities for a and b. We then find an optimal prefix code for this smaller set of
          characters, using this procedure recursively. The code for the original character set is
          obtained by using the code for x with a 0 appended as the code for a and with a 1
          appended as a code for b.

              We can think of prefix codes as paths in binary trees. Think of following a path
          from a node to its left child as appending a 0 to a code, and proceeding from a node
          to its right child as appending a 1. If we label the leaves of a binary tree by the
          characters represented, we can represent any prefix code as a binary tree. The prefix
          property guarantees no character can have a code that is an interior node, and
          conversely, labeling the leaves of any binary tree with characters gives us a code
          with the prefix property for these characters.

          Example 3.12. The binary trees for Code 1 and Code 2 of Fig. 3.22 are shown in
          Fig. 3.23(a) and (b), respectively.

             We shall implement Huffman's algorithm using a forest (collection of trees), each
          of which has its leaves labeled by characters whose codes we desire to select and
          whose roots are labeled by the sum of the probabilities of all the leaf labels. We call
          this sum the weight of the tree. Initially, each character is in a one-node tree by itself,
          and when the algorithm ends, there will be only one tree, with all the characters at its



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (21 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          leaves. In this tree, the path from the root to any leaf represents the code for the label
          of that leaf, according to the left = 0, right = 1 scheme of Fig. 3.23.

             The essential step of the algorithm is to select the two trees in the forest that have
          the smallest weights (break ties arbitrarily). Combine these two trees into one, whose
          weight is the sum of the weights of the two trees. To combine the trees we create a
          new node, which becomes the root and has the




                       Fig. 3.23. Binary trees representing codes with the prefix property.

          roots of the two given trees as left and right children (which is which doesn't matter).
          This process continues until only one tree remains. That tree represents a code that,
          for the probabilities given, has the minimum possible average code length.

          Example 3.13. The sequence of steps taken for the characters and probabilities in
          our running example is shown in Fig. 3.24. From Fig. 3.24(e) we see the code words
          for a, b, c, d, and e are 1111, 0, 110, 1110, and 10. In this example, there is only one
          nontrivial tree, but in general, there can be many. For example, if the probabilities of
          b and e were .33 and .32, then after Fig. 3.24(c) we would combine b and e, rather
          than attaching e to the large tree as we did in Fig. 3.24(d).

              Let us now describe the needed data structures. First, we shall use an array TREE
          of records of the type


                 record
                   leftchild: integer;
                   rightchild: integer;
                   parent: integer;
                 end


          to represent binary trees. Parent pointers facilitate finding paths from leaves to roots,
          so we can discover the code for a character. Second, we use an array ALPHABET of
          records of type


                 record
                   symbol: char;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (22 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                   probability: real;
                   leaf: integer { cursor into tree }
                 end




                                                            (e) Final tree

                                Fig. 3.24. Steps in the construction of a Huffman tree.

          to associate, with each symbol of the alphabet being encoded, its corresponding leaf.
          This array also records the probability of each character. Third, we need an array
          FOREST of records that represent the trees themselves. The type of these records is


                 record
                   weight: real;
                   root: integer { cursor into tree }
                 end


          The initial values of all these arrays, assuming the data of Fig. 3.24(a), are shown in
          Fig. 3.25. A sketch of the program to build the Huffman tree is shown in Fig. 3.26.




                                             Fig. 3.25. Initial contents of arrays.


          (1)       while there is more then one tree in the forest do
                     begin
          (2)           i := index of the tree in FOREST with smallest weight;
          (3)           j := index of the tree in FOREST with second smallest weight;
          (4)           create a new node with left child FOREST[i].root and
                          right child FOREST[j].root;
          (5)           replace tree i in FOREST by a tree whose root



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (23 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                     is the new node and whose weight is
                     FOREST[i].weight +
          FOREST[j].weight;
          (6)       delete tree j from FOREST
                end;

                                    Fig. 3.26. Sketch of Huffman tree construction.

             To implement line (4) of Fig. 3.26, which increases the number of cells of the
          TREE array used, and lines (5) and (6), which decrease the number of utilized cells
          of FOREST, we shall introduce cursors lasttree and lastnode, pointing to FOREST
          and TREE, respectively. We assume that cells 1 to lasttree of FOREST and 1 to
          lastnode of TREE are occupied.† We assume that arrays of Fig. 3.25 have some
          declared lengths, but in what follows we omit comparisons between these limits and
          cursor values.


                 procedure lightones ( var least, second: integer );
                   { sets least and second to the indices in FOREST of
                       the trees of smallest weight. We assume lasttree ≥2. }
                   var
                      i: integer;
                   begin { initialize least and second, considering first two trees }
                      if FOREST[1].weight < = FOREST[2].weight
          then
                    begin least := 1; second := 2 end
                 else
                    begin least := 2; second := 1 end;
                 { Now let i run from 3 to lasttree. At each iteration
                    least is the tree of smallest weight among the first i trees
                    in FOREST, and second is the next smallest of these }
                 for i := 3 to lasttree do
                    if FOREST[i].weight <
          FOREST[least].weight then
                       begin second := least; least := i
          end
                    else if FOREST[i].weight <
          FOREST[second].weight then
                       second: = i
               end; { lightones }

                 function create ( lefttree, righttree: integer ): integer;
                   { returns new node whose left and right children are


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (24 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                    FOREST[lefttree].root and
          FOREST[righttree].root }
                 begin
                    lastnode := lastnode + 1;
                       { cell for new node is TREE[lastnode] }
                    TREE[lastnode].leftchild : =
          FOREST[lefttree].root;
                    TREE[lastnode].rightchild : =
          FOREST[righttree].root;
                    { now enter parent pointers for new node and its children }
                    TREE[lastnode].parent := 0;
                    TREE[FOREST[lefttree].root].parent :=
          lastnode;
                    TREE[FOREST[righttree].root].parent :=
          lastnode;
                    return(lastnode)
                 end; { create }

                                                   Fig. 3.27. Two procedures.

             Figure 3.27 shows two useful procedures. The first implements lines (2) and (3)
          of Fig. 3.26 to select indices of the two trees of smallest weight. The second is the
          command create(n1, n2) that creates a new node and makes n1 and n2 its left and
          right children.

             Now the steps of Fig. 3.26 can be described in greater detail. A procedure
          Huffman, which has no input or output, but works on the global structures of Fig.
          3.25, is shown in Fig. 3.28.


             procedure Huffman;
              var
                 i, j: integer; { the two trees of least weight in FOREST }
                 newroot: integer;
              begin
                 while lasttree > 1 do begin
                     lightones(i, j);
                     newroot := create(i, j);
                     { Now replace tree i by the tree whose root is newroot }
                     FOREST[i].weight := FOREST[i].weight +
          FOREST[j].weight;
                     FOREST[i].root := newroot;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (25 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                        { next, replace tree j, which is no longer needed, by lasttree,
                           and shrink FOREST by one }
                        FOREST[j] := FOREST[lasttree];
                        lasttree := lasttree - 1
                     end
                   end; { Huffman }

                                               Fig. 3.28. Huffman's algorithm.

              Figure 3.29 shows the data structure of Fig. 3.25 after lasttree has been reduced to
          3, that is, when the forest looks like Fig. 3.24(c).




                                   Fig. 3.29. Tree data structure after two iterations.

             After completing execution of the algorithm, the code for each symbol can be
          determined as follows. Find the symbol in the symbol field of the ALPHABET array.
          Follow the leaf field of the same record to get to a record of the TREE array; this
          record corresponds to the leaf for that symbol. Repeatedly follow the parent pointer
          from the "current" record, say for node n, to the record of the TREE array for its
          parent p. Remember node n, so it is possible to examine the leftchild and rightchild
          pointers for node p and see which is n. In the former case, print 0, in the latter print
          1. The sequence of bits printed is the code for the symbol, in reverse. If we wish the
          bits printed in the correct order, we could push each onto a stack as we go up the
          tree, and then repeatedly pop the stack, printing symbols as we pop them.


          Pointer-Based Implementations of Binary
          Trees
          Instead of using cursors to point to left and right children (and parents if we wish),
          we can use true Pascal pointers. For example, we might declare


                 type
                   node = record
                     leftchild: ↑ node;
                     rightchild: ↑ node;
                     parent: ↑ node;


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (26 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                      end


          For example, if we used this type for nodes of a binary tree, the function create of
          Fig. 3.27 could be written as in Fig. 3.30.


               function create ( lefttree, righttree: ↑ node ): ↑ node;
                  var
                     root: ↑ node;
                  begin
                     new(root);
                     root ↑.leftchild := lefttree;
                     root ↑.rightchild :=
          righttree;
                     root ↑.parent := 0;
                     lefttree ↑.parent := root;
                     righttree ↑.parent := root;
                     return (root)
                  end; { create }

                              Fig. 3.30. Pointer-based implementation of binary trees.


          Exercises

                       Answer the following questions about the tree of Fig. 3.31.

                             a. Which nodes are leaves?
                             b. Which node is the root?
                             c. What is the parent of node C?
                             d. Which nodes are children of C?
                             e. Which nodes are ancestors of E?
                             f. Which nodes are descendants of E?
                             g. What are the right siblings of D and E?
                             h. Which nodes are to the left and to the right of G?
                3.1          i. What is the depth of node C?
                             j. What is the height of node C?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (27 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                                                               Fig. 3.31. A tree.


                       In the tree of Fig. 3.31 how many different paths of length three are
                3.2
                       there?

                       Write programs to compute the height of a tree using each of the three
                3.3
                       tree representations of Section 3.3.

                       List the nodes of Fig. 3.31 in

                             a. preorder,
                3.4
                             b. postorder, and
                             c. inorder.


                       If m and n are two different nodes in the same tree, show that exactly one
                       of the following statements is true:

                             a. m is to the left of n
                3.5
                             b. m is to the right of n
                             c. m is a proper ancestor of n
                             d. m is a proper descendant of n.


                       Place a check in row i and column j if the two conditions represented by
                       row i and column j can occur simultaneously.




                3.6


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (28 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                       For example, put a check in row 3 and column 2 if you believe that n can
                       be a proper ancestor of m and at the same time n can precede m in
                       inorder.

                       Suppose we have arrays PREORDER[n], INORDER[n], and
                       POSTORDER[n] that give the preorder, inorder, and postorder positions,
                3.7    respectively, of each node n of a tree. Describe an algorithm that tells
                       whether node i is an ancestor of node j, for any pair of nodes i and j.
                       Explain why your algorithm works.

                       We can test whether a node m is a proper ancestor of a node n by testing
                       whether m precedes n in X-order but follows n in Y-order, where X and
              *3.8
                       Y are chosen from {pre, post, in}. Determine all those pairs X and Y for
                       which this statement holds.

                       Write programs to traverse a binary tree in

                             a. preorder,
                3.9
                             b. postorder,
                             c. inorder.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (29 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                       The level-order listing of the nodes of a tree first lists the root, then all
                       nodes of depth 1, then all nodes of depth 2, and so on. Nodes at the same
              3.10
                       depth are listed in left-to-right order. Write a program to list the nodes of
                       a tree in level-order.

                       Convert the expression ((a + b) + c * (d + e) + f) * (g + h) to a

              3.11           a. prefix expression
                             b. postfix expression.


                       Draw tree representations for the prefix expressions

              3.12           a. *a + b*c + de
                             b. *a + *b + cde


                       Let T be a tree in which every nonleaf node has two children. Write a
                       program to convert

              3.13           a. a preorder listing of T into a postorder listing,
                             b. a postorder listing of T into a preorder listing,
                             c. a preorder listing of T into an inorder listing.


                       Write a program to evaluate

                             a. preorder
              3.14
                             b. postorder

                       arithmetic expressions.

                   We can define a binary tree as an ADT with the binary tree structure as a
                   mathematical model and with operations such as LEFTCHILD(n),
                   RIGHTCHILD(n), PARENT(n), and NULL(n). The first three operations
              3.15
                   return the left child, the right child, and the parent of node n (Λ if there is
                   none) and the last returns true if and only if n is Λ. Implement these
                   procedures using the binary tree representation of Fig. 3.21.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (30 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




                       Implement the seven tree operations of Section 3.2 using the following
                       tree implementations:

              3.16           a. parent pointers
                             b. lists of children
                             c. leftmost-child, right-sibling pointers.


                       The degree of a node is the number of children it has. Show that in any
              3.17     binary tree the number of leaves is one more than the number of nodes of
                       degree two.

                       Show that the maximum number of nodes in a binary tree of height h is
              3.18     2h+1 - 1. A binary tree of height h with the maximum number of nodes is
                       called a full binary tree.

                       Suppose trees are implemented by leftmost-child, right-sibling and parent
            *3.19      pointers. Give nonrecursive preorder, postorder, and inorder traversal
                       algorithms that do not use "states" or a stack, as Fig. 3.9 does.

                       Suppose characters a, b, c, d, e, f have probabilities .07, .09, .12, .22, .23,
              3.20     .27, respectively. Find an optimal Huffman code and draw the Huffman
                       tree. What is the average code length?

                       Suppose T is a Huffman tree, and that the leaf for symbol a has greater
            *3.21      depth than the leaf for symbol b. Prove that the probability of symbol b is
                       no less than that of a.

                       Prove that Huffman's algorithm works, i.e., it produces an optimal code
            *3.22
                       for the given probabilities. Hint: Use Exercise 3.21.


          Bibliographic Notes
          Berge [1958] and Harary [1969] discuss the mathematical properties of trees. Knuth
          [1973] and Nievergelt [1974] contain additional information on binary search trees.
          Many of the works on graphs and applications referenced in Chapter 6 also cover
          material on trees.

             The algorithm given in Section 3.4 for finding a tree with a minimal weighted
          path length is from Huffman [1952]. Parker [1980] gives some more recent
          explorations into that algorithm.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (31 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 3: Trees




          † Recall our discussion of recursion in Section 2.6 in which we illustrated how the
          implementation of a recursive procedure involves a stack of activation records. If we
          examine Fig. 3.8, we can observe that when PREORDER(n) is called, the active
          procedure calls, and therefore the stack of activation records, correspond to the calls
          of PREORDER for all the ancestors of n. Thus our nonrecursive preorder procedure,
          like the example in Section 2.6, models closely the way the recursive procedure is
          implemented.

          † For the data reading phase, which we omit, we also need a cursor for the array
          ALPHABET as it fills with symbols and their probabilities.

                                            Table of Contents           Go to Chapter 4




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1203.htm (32 of 32) [1.7.2001 19:01:17]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_2.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_2.gif [1.7.2001 19:01:28]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_4.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_4.gif [1.7.2001 19:01:33]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_7.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_7.gif [1.7.2001 19:01:41]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_8.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_8.gif [1.7.2001 19:01:45]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_9.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_9.gif [1.7.2001 19:02:03]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_10.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_10.gif [1.7.2001 19:02:10]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_13.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_13.gif [1.7.2001 19:02:14]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:02:20]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_17.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_17.gif [1.7.2001 19:02:30]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_20.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_20.gif [1.7.2001 19:02:46]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_21.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_21.gif [1.7.2001 19:02:55]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_27.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig2_27.gif [1.7.2001 19:03:22]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          Basic Operations on Sets
          The set is the basic structure underlying all of mathematics. In algorithm design, sets
          are used as the basis of many important abstract data types, and many techniques have
          been developed for implementing set-based abstract data types. In this chapter we
          review the basic operations on sets and introduce some simple implementations for
          sets. We present the "dictionary" and "priority queue," two abstract data types based
          on the set model. Implementations for these abstract data types are covered in this and
          the next chapter.


          4.1 Introduction to Sets
          A set is a collection of members (or elements); each member of a set either is itself a
          set or is a primitive element called an atom. All members of a set are different, which
          means no set can contain two copies of the same element.

             When used as tools in algorithm and data structure design, atoms usually are
          integers, characters, or strings, and all elements in any one set are usually of the same
          type. We shall often assume that atoms are linearly ordered by a relation, usually
          denoted "<" and read "less than" or "precedes." A linear order < on a set S satisfies
          two properties:

               1. For any a and b in S, exactly one of a < b, a = b, or b < a is true.

               2. For all a, b, and c in S, if a < b and b < c, then a < c (transitivity).

          Integers, reals, characters, and character strings have a natural linear ordering for
          which < is used in Pascal. A linear ordering can be defined on objects that consist of
          sets of ordered objects. We leave as an exercise how one develops such an ordering.
          For example, one question to be answered in constructing a linear order for a set of
          integers is whether the set consisting of integers 1 and 4 should be regarded as being
          less than or greater than the set consisting of 2 and 3.


          Set Notation
          A set of atoms is generally exhibited by putting curly brackets around its members, so
          {1, 4} denotes the set whose only members are 1 and 4. We should bear in mind that
          a set is not a list, even though we represent sets in this manner as if they were lists.
          The order in which the elements of a set are listed is irrelevant, and we could just as
          well have written {4, 1} in place of {1, 4}. Note also that in a set each element



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (1 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          appears exactly once, so {1, 4, 1} is not a set.†

              Sometimes we represent sets by set formers, which are expressions of the form

                      { x | statement about x }

          where the statement about x is a predicate that tells us exactly what is needed for an
          arbitrary object x to be in the set. For example, {x | x is a positive integer and x ≤
          1000} is another way of representing {1, 2, . . . , 1000}, and {x | for some integer y, x
          = y2} denotes the set of perfect squares. Note that the set of perfect squares is infinite
          and cannot be represented by listing its members.

              The fundamental relationship of set theory is membership, which is denoted by the
          symbol ∈. That is, x ∈ A means that element x is a member of set A; the element x
          could be an atom or another set, but A cannot be an atom. We use x ∉ A for "x is not a
          member of A." There is a special set, denoted Ø and called the null set or empty set,
          that has no members. Note that Ø is a set, not an atom, even though the set Ø does not
          have any members. The distinction is that x ∈ Ø is false for every x, whereas if y is an
          atom, then x ∈ y doesn't even make sense; it is syntactically meaningless rather than
          false.

             We say set A is included (or contained) in set B, written A ⊆ B, or B ⊇ A, if every
          member of A is also a member of B. We also say A is a subset of B and B is a superset
          of A, if A ⊆ B. For example, {1, 2} ⊆ {1, 2, 3}, but {1, 2, 3} is not a subset of {1, 2}
          since 3 is a member of the former but not the latter. Every set is included in itself, and
          the empty set is included in every set. Two sets are equal if each is included in the
          other, that is, if their members are the same. Set A is a proper subset or proper
          superset of set B if A ≠ B, and A ⊆ B or A ⊇ B, respectively.

             The most basic operations on sets are union, intersection, and difference. If A and
          B are sets, then A ∪ B, the union of A and B, is the set of elements that are members
          of A or B or both. The intersection of A and B, written A ∩ B, is the set of elements in
          both A and B, and the difference, A - B, is the set of elements in A that are not in B.
          For example, if A = {a, b, c} and B = {b, d}, then A ∪ B = {a, b, c, d}, A ∩ B = {b},
          and A - B = {a, c}.


          Abstract Data Types Based on Sets
          We shall consider ADT's that incorporate a variety of set operations. Some
          collections of these operations have been given special names and have special
          implementations of high efficiency. Some of the more common set operations are the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (2 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          following.

               1. -3. The three procedures UNION(A, B, C), INTERSECTION(A, B, C), and
                  DIFFERENCE(A, B, C) take set-valued arguments A and B, and assign the
                  result, A ∪ B, A ∩ B, or A - B, respectively, to the set variable C.

               4. We shall sometimes use an operation called merge, or disjoint set union, that is
                  no different from union, but that assumes its operands are disjoint (have no
                  members in common). The procedure MERGE(A, B, C) assigns to the set
                  variable C the value A ∪ B, but is not defined if A ∩ B ≠ Ø, i.e., if A and B are
                  not disjoint.

               5. The function MEMBER(x, A) takes set A and object x, whose type is the type
                  of elements of A, and returns a boolean value -- true if x ∈ A and false if x ∉ A.

               6. The procedure MAKENULL(A) makes the null set be the value for set
                  variable A.

               7. The procedure INSERT(x, A), where A is a set-valued variable, and x is an
                  element of the type of A's members, makes x a member of A. That is, the new
                  value of A is A ∪ {x}. Note that if x is already a member of A, then INSERT(x,
                  A) does not change A.

               8. DELETE(x, A) removes x from A, i.e., A is replaced by A - {x}. If x is not in A
                  originally, DELETE(x, A) does not change A.

               9. ASSIGN(A, B) sets the value of set variable A to be equal to the value of set
                  variable B.

              10. The function MIN(A) returns the least element in set A. This operation may be
                  applied only when the members of the parameter set are linearly ordered. For
                  example, MIN({2, 3, 1}) = 1 and MIN({'a','b','c'}) = 'a'. We also use a function
                  MAX with the obvious meaning.

              11. EQUAL(A, B) is a function whose value is true if and only if sets A and B
                  consist of the same elements.

              12. The function FIND(x) operates in an environment where there is a collection
                  of disjoint sets. FIND(x) returns the name of the (unique) set of which x is a
                  member.


          4.2 An ADT with Union, Intersection, and
          Difference

http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (3 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          We begin by defining an ADT for the mathematical model "set" with the three basic
          set-theoretic operations, union, intersection, and difference. First we give an example
          where such an ADT is useful and then we discuss several simple implementations of
          this ADT.

          Example 4.1. Let us write a program to do a simple form of "data-flow analysis" on
          flowcharts that represent procedures. The program will use variables of an abstract
          data type SET, whose operations are UNION, INTERSECTION, DIFFERENCE,
          EQUAL, ASSIGN, and MAKENULL, as defined in the previous section.

               In Fig. 4.1 we see a flowchart whose boxes have been named B1, . . . , B8, and for
          which the data definitions (read and assignment statements) have been numbered 1, 2,
          . . . , 9. This flowchart happens to implement the Euclidean algorithm, to compute the
          greatest common divisor of inputs p and q, but the details of the algorithm are not
          relevant to the example.

              In general, data-flow analysis refers to that part of a compiler that examines a
          flowchart-like representation of a source program, such as Fig. 4.1, and collects
          information about what can be true as control reaches each box of the flowchart. The
          boxes are often called blocks or basic blocks, and they represent collections of
          statements through which the flow-of-control proceeds sequentially. The information
          collected during data-flow analysis is used to help improve the code generated by the
          compiler. For example, if data-flow analysis told us that each time control reached
          block B, variable x had the value 27, then we could substitute 27 for all uses of x in
          block B, unless x were assigned a new value within block B. If constants can be
          accessed more quickly than variables, this change could speed up the code produced
          by the compiler.

              In our example, we want to determine where a variable could last have been given
          a new value. That is, we want to compute for each block Bi the set DEFIN[i] of data
          definitions d such that there is a path from B1 to Bi in which d appears, but is not
          followed by any other definition of the same variable as d defines. DEFIN[i] is called
          the set of reaching definitions for Bi.

              To see how such information could be useful, consider Fig. 4.1. The first block B1
          is a "dummy" block of three data definitions, making the three variables t, p, and q
          have "undefined" values. If we discover, for example, that DEFIN[7] includes
          definition 3, which gives q an undefined value, then the program might contain a bug,
          as apparently it could print q without first assigning a valid value to q. Fortunately,
          we shall discover that it is impossible to reach block B7 without assigning to q; that is,



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (4 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          3 is not in DEFIN[7].

             The computation of the DEFIN[i]'s is aided by several rules. First, we precompute
          for each block i two sets GEN[i] and KILL[i]. GEN[i] is the set of data definitions in
          block i, with the exception that if Bi contains two or more definitions of variable x,
          then only the last is in GEN[i]. Thus, GEN[i] is the set of definitions in Bi that are
          "generated" by Bi; they reach the end of Bi without having their variables redefined.

             The set KILL[i] is the set of definitions d not in Bi such that Bi has a definition of
          the same variable as d. For example, in Fig. 4.1, GEN[4] = {6}, since definition 6 (of
          variable t) is in B4 and there are no subsequent definitions of t in B4. KILL[4] = {l, 9},
          since these are the definitions of variable t that are not in B4.




                                    Fig. 4.1. A flowchart of the Euclidean algorithm.

             In addition to the DEFIN[i]'s, we compute the set DEFOUT[i] for each block Bi.
          Just as DEFIN[i] is the set of definitions that reach the beginning of Bi, DEFOUT[i] is
          the set of definitions reaching the end of Bi. There is a simple formula relating DEFIN
          and DEFOUT, namely




          That is, definition d reaches the end of Bi if and only if it either reaches the beginning
          of Bi and is not killed by Bi, or it is generated in Bi. The second rule relating DEFIN
          and DEFOUT is that DEFIN[i] is the union, over all predecessors p of Bi, of
          DEFOUT[p], that is:




          Rule (4.2) says that a data definition enters Bi if and only if it reaches the end of one
          of Bi's predecessors. As a special case, if Bi has no predecessors, as B1 in Fig. 4.1,
          then DEFIN[i] = ∅.


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (5 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




             Because we have introduced a variety of new concepts in this example, we shall
          not try to complicate matters by writing a general algorithm for computing the
          reaching definitions of an arbitrary flowgraph. Rather, we shall write a part of a
          program that assumes GEN[i] and KILL[i] are available for i = 1, . . . , 8 and
          computes DEFIN[i] and DEFOUT[i] for 1, . . . , 8, assuming the particular flowgraph
          of Fig. 4.1. This program fragment assumes the existence of an ADT SET with
          operations UNION, INTERSECTION, DIFFERENCE, EQUAL, ASSIGN, and
          MAKENULL; we shall give alternative implementations of this ADT later.

             The procedure propagate( GEN, KILL, DEFIN, DEFOUT) applies rule (4.1) to
          compute DEFOUT for a block, given DEFIN. If a program were loop-free, then the
          calculation of DEFOUT would be straightforward. The presence of a loop in the
          program fragment of Fig. 4.2 necessitates an iterative procedure. We approximate
          DEFIN[i] by starting with DEFIN[i] = Ø and DEFOUT[i] = GEN[i] for all i, and then
          repeatedly apply (4.1) and (4.2) until no more changes to DEFIN's and DEFOUT's
          occur. Since each new value assigned to DEFIN[i] or DEFOUT[i] can be shown to be
          a superset (not necessarily proper) of its former value, and there are only a finite
          number of data definitions in any program, the process must converge eventually to a
          solution to (4.1) and (4.2).

             The successive values of DEFIN[i] after each iteration of the repeat-loop are
          shown in Fig. 4.3. Note that none of the dummy assignments 1, 2, and 3 reaches a
          block where their variable is used, so there are no undefined variable uses in the
          program of Fig. 4.1. Also note that by deferring the application of (4.2) for Bi until
          just before we apply (4.1) for Bi would make the process of Fig. 4.2 converge in
          fewer iterations in general.


          4.3 A Bit-Vector Implementation of Sets
          The best implementation of a SET ADT depends on the operations to be performed
          and on the size of the set. When all sets in our domain of discourse are subsets of a
          small "universal set" whose elements are the integers 1, . . . , N for some fixed N, then
          we can use a bit-vector (boolean array) implementation. A set is represented by a bit
          vector in which the ith bit is true if i is an element of the set. The major advantage of
          this representation



                 var
                    GEN, KILL, DEFIN, DEFOUT: array[l..8] of SET;
                     { we assume GEN and KILL are computed externally }


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (6 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                     i: integer;
                     changed: boolean;

              procedure propagate ( G, K, I: SET; var
          O: SET );
                { apply (4.1) and set changed to true if
                    a change in DEFOUT is detected }
                var
                    TEMP: SET;
                begin
                    DIFFERENCE(I, K, TEMP);
                    UNION(TEMP, G, TEMP);
                    if not EQUAL(TEMP, O) do begin
                         ASSIGN(O, TEMP);
                         changed := true
                    end
                 end; { propagate }

             begin
                for i:= 1 to 8 do
                  ASSIGN(DEFOUT[i], GEN[i]);
                repeat
                  changed := false;
                  {the next 8 statements apply (4.2) for the
                        graph of Fig. 4.1 only}
                  MAKENULL(DEFIN[1]);
                  ASSIGN(DEFIN[2], DEFOUT[1]);
                  ASSIGN(DEFIN[3], DEFOUT[2]);
                  ASSIGN(DEFIN[4], DEFOUT[3]);
                  UNION(DEFOUT[4], DEFOUT[8], DEFIN[5]);
                  UNION(DEFOUT[3], DEFOUT[5], DEFIN[6]);
                  ASSIGN(DEFIN[7], DEFOUT[6]);
                  ASSIGN(DEFIN[8], DEFOUT[6]);
                  for i:= 1 to 8 do
                        propagate(GEN[i], KILL[i],
          DEFIN[i], DEFOUT[i]);
                until
                  not changed
             end.

                                   Fig. 4.2. Program to compute reaching definitions.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (7 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                                           Fig. 4.3. DEFIN[i] after each iteration.

          is that MEMBER, INSERT, and DELETE operations can be performed in constant
          time by directly addressing the appropriate bit. UNION, INTERSECTION, and
          DIFFERENCE can be performed in time proportional to the size of the universal set.

             If the universal set is sufficiently small so that a bit vector fits in one computer
          word, then UNION, INTERSECTION, and DIFFERENCE can be performed by
          single logical operations in the language of the underlying machine. Certain small sets
          can be represented directly in Pascal using the set construct. The maximum size of
          such sets depends on the particular compiler used and, unfortunately, it is often too
          small to be used in typical set problems. However, in writing our own programs, we
          need not be constrained by any limit on our set size, as long as we can treat our sets as
          subsets of some universal set {1, . . . , N}. We intend that if A is a set represented as a
          boolean array, then A[i] is true if and only if element i is a member of A. Thus, we can
          define an ADT SET by the Pascal declaration


                 const
                    N = { whatever value is appropriate };
                 type
                    SET = packed array[1..N] of boolean;

          We can then implement the procedure UNION as shown in Fig. 4.4. To implement
          INTERSECTION and DIFFERENCE, we replace "or" in Fig. 4.4 by "and" and "and
          not," respectively. The reader can implement the other operations mentioned in
          Section 4.1 (except MERGE and FIND, which make little sense in this context) as
          easy exercises.

              It is possible to use the bit-vector implementation of sets when the universal set is
          a finite set other than a set of consecutive integers. Normally, we would then need a
          way to translate between members of the universal set and the integers 1, . . . , N.
          Thus, in Example 4.1 we assumed that the data definitions were assigned numbers
          from 1 to 9. In general, the translations in


                 procedure UNION ( A, B: SET; var C: SET );
                   var
                     i: integer;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (8 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                    begin
                      for i := 1 to N do
                        C[i] := A[i] or B[i]
                    end

                                             Fig. 4.4. Implementation of UNION.

          both directions could be performed by the MAPPING ADT described in Chapter 2.
          However, the inverse translation from integers to elements of the universal set can be
          accomplished better using an array A, where A[i] is the element corresponding to
          integer i.


          4.4 A Linked-List Implementation of Sets
          It should also be evident that sets can be represented by linked lists, where the items
          in the list are the elements of the set. Unlike the bit-vector representation, the list
          representation uses space proportional to the size of the set represented, not the size of
          the universal set. Moreover, the list representation is somewhat more general since it
          can handle sets that need not be subsets of some finite universal set.

              When we have operations like INTERSECTION on sets represented by linked
          lists, we have several options. If the universal set is linearly ordered, then we can
          represent a set by a sorted list. That is, we assume all set members are comparable by
          a relation "<" and the members of a set appear on a list in the order e1, e2, . . . , en,
          where e1 < e2 < e3 < . . . < en. The advantage of a sorted list is that we do not need to
          search the entire list to determine whether an element is on the list.

            An element is in the intersection of lists L1 and L2 if and only if it is on both lists.
          With unsorted lists we must match each element on L1 with each element on L2, a
          process that takes O(n2) steps on lists of length n. The reason that sorting the lists
          makes intersection and some other operations easy is that if we wish to match an
          element e on one list L1 with the elements of another list L2, we have only to look
          down L2 until we either find e, or find an element greater than e; in the first case we
          have found the match, while in the second case, we know none exists. More
          importantly, if d is the element on L1 that immediately precedes e, and we have found
          onL2 the first element, say f, such that d ≤ f, then to search L2 for an occurrence of e
          we can begin with f. The conclusion from this reasoning is that we can find matches
          for all the elements of L1, if they exist, by scanning L1 and L2 once, provided we
          advance the position markers for the two lists in the proper order, always advancing
          the one with the smaller element. The routine to implement INTERSECTION is



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (9 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          shown in Fig. 4.5. There, sets are represented by linked lists of "cells" whose type is
          defined


                 type
                    celltype = record
                       element: elementtype;
                       next: ↑ celltype
                    end

          Figure 4.5 assumes elementtype is a type, such as integer, that can be compared by <.
          If not, we have to write a function that determines which of two elements precedes
          the other.

             The linked lists in Fig. 4.5 are headed by empty cells that serve as entry points to
          the lists. The reader may, as an exercise, write this program in a more general abstract
          form using list primitives. The program in Fig. 4.5, however, may be more efficient
          than the more abstract program. For example, Fig. 4.5 uses pointers to particular cells
          rather than "position" variables that point to previous cells. We can do so because we
          only append to list C, and A and B are only scanned, with no insertions or deletions
          done on those lists.

              The operations of UNION and DIFFERENCE can be written to look surprisingly
          like the INTERSECTION procedure of Fig. 4.5. For UNION, we must attach all
          elements from either the A or B list to the C list, in their proper, sorted order, so when
          the elements are unequal (lines 12-14), we add the smaller to the C list just as we do
          when the elements are equal. We also append to list C all elements on the list not
          exhausted when the test of line (5) fails. For DIFFERENCE we do not add an element
          to the C list when equal elements are found. We only add the current A list element to
          the C list when it is smaller than the current B list element; for then we know the
          former cannot be found on the B list. Also, we add to C those elements on A when
          and if the test of line (5) fails because B is exhausted.

              The operator ASSIGN(A, B) copies list A into list B. Note that, this operator
          cannot be implemented simply by making the header cell of A point to the same place
          as the header cell of B, because in that case, subsequent changes to B would cause
          unexpected changes to A. The MIN operator is especially easy; just return the first
          element on the list. DELETE and FIND can be implemented by finding the target
          item as discussed for general lists and in the case of a DELETE, disposing of its cell.

             Lastly, insertion is not difficult to implement, but we must arrange to insert the
          new element into the proper position. Figure 4.6 shows a procedure INSERT that
          takes as parameters an element and a pointer to the header cell of a list, and inserts the


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (10 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          element into the list. Figure 4.7 shows the crucial cells and pointers just before (solid)
          and after (dashed) insertion.



               procedure INTERSECTION ( ahead, bhead: ↑ celltype;
                        var pc: ↑ celltype );
                { computes the intersection of sorted lists A and B with
                   header cells ahead and bhead, leaving the result
                   as a sorted list whose header is pointed to by pc }
               var
                acurrent, bcurrent, ccurrent: ↑ celltype;
                {the current cells of lists A and B, and the last cell added list C }
               begin
          (1)      new(pc); { create header for list C }
          (2)      acurrent := ahead↑.next;
          (3)      bcurrent := bhead ↑.next;
          (4)      ccurrent := pc;
          (5)      while (acurrent <> nil) and (bcurrent <> nil)
          do begin
                     { compare current elements on lists A and B }
          (6)         if acurrent ↑.element =
          bcurrent ↑.element then begin
                       { add to intersection }
          (7)            new( ccurrent ↑.next );
          (8)            ccurrent := ccurrent ↑.next;
          (9)            ccurrent ↑.element := acurrent
          ↑.element;
          (10            acurrent := acurrent↑.next;
          (11            bcurrent := bcurrent↑.next
                     end
                     else { elements unequal }
          (12)             if acurrent↑.element <
          bcurrent↑.element then
          (13)                  acurrent := acurrent↑.next
                         else
          (14)                  bcurrent := bcurrent↑.next
                end;
          (15) ccurrent↑.next := nil
              end; { INTERSECTION }

                                    Fig. 4.5. Intersection procedure using sorted lists.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (11 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          4.5 The Dictionary
          When we use a set in the design of an algorithm, we may not need powerful
          operations like union and intersection. Often, we only need to keep a set of "current"
          objects, with periodic insertions and deletions from the set. Also, from time to time
          we may need to know whether a particular element is in the set. A set ADT with the
          operations INSERT, DELETE, and MEMBER has been given the name dictionary.
          We shall also include MAKENULL as a dictionary operation to initialize whatever
          data structure is used in the implementation. Let us consider an example application
          of the dictionary, and then discuss implementations that are well suited for
          representing dictionaries.



               procedure INSERT ( x: elementtype; p: ↑ celltype );
                  { inserts x onto list whose header is pointed to by p }
                  var
                    current, newcell: ↑ celltype;
                  begin
                    current := p;
                    while current↑.next <>
          nil do begin
                       if current↑.next↑.element = x then
                          return; { if x is already on the list, return }
                       if current↑.next↑.element > x then
                          goto add; { break }
                       current: = current↑.next
                    end;
                  add: { current is now the cell after which x is to be inserted }
                    new(newcell);
                    newcell↑.element := x;
                    newcell↑.next :=
          current↑.next;
                    current↑.next := newcell
                  end; { INSERT }

                                                  Fig. 4.6. Insertion procedure.

          Example 4.2. The Society for the Prevention of Injustice to Tuna (SPIT) keeps a
          database recording the most recent votes of legislators on issues of importance to tuna
          lovers. This database is, conceptually, two sets of legislators' names, called goodguys


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (12 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          and badguys. The society is very forgiving of past mistakes, but also tends to forget
          former friends easily. For example, if a vote to declare Lake Erie off limits to tuna
          fishermen is taken, all legislators voting in favor will be inserted into goodguys and
          deleted from badguys, while the opposite will happen to those voting against.
          Legislators not voting remain in whatever set they were in, if any.

             In operation, the database system accepts three commands, each represented by a
          single character, followed by a ten character string denoting the name of a legislator.
          Each command is on a separate line. The commands are:

               1. F (a legislator voting favorably follows)

               2. U (a legislator voting unfavorably follows)

               3. ? (determine the status of the legislator that follows).

          We also allow the character 'E' on the input line to signal the end of processing.
          Figure 4.8 shows the sketch of the program, written in terms of the as-yet-undefined
          ADT DICTIONARY, which in this case is intended to be a set of strings of length 10.




                                                 Fig. 4.7. The insertion picture.


          4.6 Simple Dictionary Implementations
          A dictionary can be implemented by a sorted or unsorted linked list. Another possible
          implementation of a dictionary is by a bit vector, provided the elements of the
          underlying set are restricted to the integers 1, . . . , N for some N, or are restricted to a
          set that can be put in correspondence with such a set of integers.

              A third possible implementation of a dictionary is to use a fixed- length array with
          a pointer to the last entry of the array in use. This implementation is only feasible if
          we can assume our sets never get larger than the length of the array. It has the
          advantage of simplicity over the linked-list representation, while its disadvantages are
          that (1) sets cannot grow arbitrarily, (2 deletion is slower, and (3) space is not utilized
          efficiently if sets are of varying sizes.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (13 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




              It is for the last of these reasons that we did not discuss the array implementation
          in connection with sets whose unions and intersections were taken frequently. Since
          arrays as well as lists can be sorted, however, the reader could consider the array
          implementation we now describe for dictionaries as a possible implementation for
          sets in general. Figure 4.9 shows the declarations and procedures necessary to
          supplement Fig. 4.8 to make it a working program.


                 program tuna ( input, output );
                  { legislative database }
                  type
                    nametype = array[l..10] of char;
                  var
                    command: char;
                    legislator: nametype;
                    goodguys, badguys: DICTIONARY;

                   procedure favor (friend: nametype );
                    begin
                       INSERT(friend, goodguys) ;
                       DELETE(friend, badguys)
                    end; { favor }

                   procedure unfavor ( foe: nametype );
                    begin
                       INSERT(foe, badguys ) ;
                       DELETE(foe, goodguys )
                    end; { unfavor }
                   procedure report ( subject: nametype );
                    begin
                       if MEMBER(subject, goodguys) then
                          writeln(subject, 'is a friend')
                       else if MEMBER(subject, badguys) then
                          writeln(subject, 'is a foe')
                       else
                          writeln('we have no information about ', subject)
                       end; { report }

                 begin { main program }
                   MAKENULL(goodguys);
                   MAKENULL(badguys);
                   read(command);
                   while command < > 'E' do begin
                     readln (legislator);



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (14 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                      if command = 'F' then
                          favor(legislator)
                      else if command = 'U' then
                          unfavor(legislator)
                      else if command = '?' then
                          report(legislator)
                      else
                          error('unknown command');
                      read(command)
                   end
                 end. { tuna }

                                     Fig. 4.8. Outline of the SPIT database program.


               const
                 maxsize = { some suitable number };
               type
                 DICTIONARY = record
                   last: integer;
                   data: array[l..maxsize] of nametype
                 end;
               procedure MAKENULL ( var A: DICTIONARY );
                 begin
                   A.last := 0
                 end; { MAKENULL }
               function MEMBER ( x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY ):
          boolean;
                 var
                   i: integer;
                 begin
                   for i := 1 to A.last do
                      if A.data [i] = x then return (true);
                   return (false) { if x is not found }
                 end; { MEMBER }
               procedure INSERT ( x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY );
                 begin
                   if not MEMBER(x, A ) then
                      If A.last < maxsize then begin
                         A.last := A.last + 1;
                         A.data[A.last ] := x
                      end
                   else error ('database is full')



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (15 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                 end; { INSERT }
               procedure DELETE ( x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY );
                 var
                   i: integer;
                 begin
                   if A.last > 0 then begin
                      i := 1;
                      while (A.data[i] <> x) and (i <
          A.last) do
                         i := i + 1;
                      { when we reach here, either x has been found, or
                         we are at the last element in set A, or both }
                      if A.data[i] = x then begin
                         A.data[i] := A.data[A.last];
                            { move the last element into the place of x;
                              Note that if i = A.last, this step does
                              nothing, but the next step will delete x }
                         A.last := A.last - 1
                      end
                   end
                 end; { DELETE }

          Fig. 4.9. Type and procedure declarations for array dictionary.


          4.7 The Hash Table Data Structure
          The array implementation of dictionaries requires, on the average, O(N) steps to
          execute a single INSERT, DELETE, or MEMBER instruction on a dictionary of N
          elements; we get a similar speed if a list implementation is used. The bit-vector
          implementation takes constant time to do any of these three operations, but we are
          limited to sets of integers in some small range for that implementation to be feasible.

             There is another important and widely useful technique for implementing
          dictionaries called "hashing." Hashing requires constant time per operation, on the
          average, and there is no requirement that sets be subsets of any particular finite
          universal set. In the worst case, this method requires time proportional to the size of
          the set for each operation, just as the array and list implementations do. By careful
          design, however, we can make the probability of hashing requiring more than a
          constant time per operation be arbitrarily small.

             We shall consider two somewhat different forms of hashing. One, called open or
          external hashing, allows the set to be stored in a potentially unlimited space, and



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (16 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          therefore places no limit on the size of the set. The second, called closed or internal
          hashing, uses a fixed space for storage and thus limits the size of sets.†


          Open Hashing
          In Fig. 4.10 we see the basic data structure for open hashing. The essential idea is that
          the (possibly infinite) set of potential set members is partitioned into a finite number
          of classes. If we wish to have B classes, numbered 0, 1, . . . , B-1, then we use a hash
          function h such that for each object x of the data type for members of the set being
          represented, h(x) is one of the integers 0 through B-1. The value of h(x), naturally, is
          the class to which x belongs. We often call x the key and h(x) the hash value of x. The
          "classes" we shall refer to as buckets, and we say that x belongs to bucket h(x).

              In an array called the bucket table, indexed by the bucket numbers 0, 1, . . . , B-1,
          we have headers for B lists. The elements on the ith list are the members of the set
          being represented that belong to class i, that is, the elements x in the set such that h(x)
          = i.

             It is our hope that the buckets will be roughly equal in size, so the list for each
          bucket will be short. If there are N elements in the set, then the average bucket will
          have N/B members. If we can estimate N and choose B to be roughly as large, then the
          average bucket will have only one or two members, and the dictionary operations
          take, on the average, some small constant number of steps, independent of what N (or
          equivalently B) is.




                                      Fig. 4.10. The open hashing data organization.

             It is not always clear that we can select h so that a typical set will have its
          members distributed fairly evenly among the buckets. We shall later have more to say
          about selecting h so that it truly "hashes" its argument, that is, so that h(x) is a
          "random" value that is not dependent on x in any trivial way.


                 function h ( x: nametype ) : O..B - 1;
                   var
                      i, sum: integer
                   begin



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (17 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                     sum: = 0;
                     for i: 1 to 10 do
                       sum: = sum + ord(x[i]);
                     h : = sum + ord(x[i]);
                   end { h }

                                             Fig. 4.11. A simple hash function h.

              Let us here, for specificity, introduce one hash function on character strings that is
          fairly good, although not perfect. The idea is to treat the characters as integers, using
          the character code of the machine to define the correspondence. Pascal provides the
          ord built-in function, where ord(c) is the integer code for character c. Thus, if x is a
          key and the type of keys is array[l..10] of char (what we called nametype in Example
          4.2), we might declare the hash function h as in Fig. 4.11. In that function we sum the
          integers for each character and divide the result by B, taking the remainder, which is
          an integer from 0 to B - 1.

              In Fig. 4.12 we see the declarations of the data structures for an open hash table
          and the procedures implementing the operations for a dictionary. The member type
          for the dictionary is assumed to be nametype (a character array), so these declarations
          can be used in Example 4.2 directly. We should note that in Fig. 4.12 we have made
          the headers of the bucket lists be pointers to cells, rather than complete cells. We did
          so because the bucket table, where the headers are, could take as much space as the
          lists themselves if we made the bucket be an array of cells rather than pointers.
          Notice, however, that we pay a price for saving this space. The code for the DELETE
          procedure now must distinguish the first cell from the remaining ones.



                 const
                   B = { suitable constant };
                 type
                   celltype = record
                      element: nametype;
                      next: ↑ celltype
                   end;
                   DICTIONARY = array[0..B - l] of ↑ celltype;

                 procedure MAKENULL ( var A: DICTIONARY );
                  var
                     i: integer;
                  begin
                     for i:= 0 to B-1 do



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (18 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                          A [i]:= nil
                   end; { MAKENULL }

               function MEMBER ( x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY ) : boolean;
                 var
                    current: ↑ celltype;
                 begin
                    current := A [h (x)];
                    { initially current is the header of x's bucket }
                    while current < > nil do
                      if current↑.element =
          x then
                          return (true)
                      else
                          current := current↑.next;
                    return (false) { if x is not found }
                 end; { MEMBER }

                 procedure INSERT ( x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY );
                  var
                     bucket: integer;
                     oldheader: ↑ celltype;
                  begin

                        if not MEMBER(x, A) then begin
                           bucket := h(x);
                           oldheader := A [bucket ];
                           new (A [bucket]);
                           A [bucket ]↑.element :=
          x;
                           A [bucket ]↑.next: =
          oldheader
                   end
                end; { INSERT }

                 procedure DELETE ( x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY );
                   var
                     current: ↑ celltype;
                     bucket: integer;
                 begin
                  bucket := h(x);
                  if A [bucket ] < > nil then begin
                     if A [bucket]↑.element



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (19 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          = x then { x is in first cell }
                        A [bucket ] := A [bucket ]↑.next { remove x from list }
                 else begin { x, if present at all, is not in first cell of bucket }
                    current := A [bucket ]; { current points to the previous
          cell }
                    while current↑.next <> nil
          do
                          if current↑.next↑.element = x then begin
                          current↑.next :=
          current↑.next↑.next;
                              { remove x from list }
                             return { break }
                         end
                         else {x not yet found}
                            current := current↑.next
                     end
                end
            end; { DELETE }

                            Fig. 4.12. Dictionary implementation by an open hash table.


          Closed Hashing
          A closed hash table keeps the members of the dictionary in the bucket table itself,
          rather than using that table to store list headers. As a consequence, it appears that we
          can put only one element in any bucket. However, associated with closed hashing is a
          rehash strategy. If we try to place x in bucket h(x) and find it already holds an
          element, a situation called a collision occurs, and the rehash strategy chooses a
          sequence of alternative locations, h1(x), h2(x), . . . , within the bucket table in which
          we could place x. We try each of these locations, in order, until we find an empty one.
          If none is empty, then the table is full, and we cannot insert x.

          Example 4.3. Suppose B = 8 and keys a, b, c, and d have hash values h(a) = 3, h(b) =
          0, h(c) = 4, h(d) = 3. We shall use the simplest rehash strategy, called linear hashing,
          where hi(x) = (h(x) + i) mod B. Thus, for example, if we wished to insert a and found
          bucket 3 already filled, we would try buckets 4, 5, 6, 7, 0, 1, and 2, in that order.

              Initially, we assume the table is empty, that is, each bucket holds a special value
          empty, which is not equal to any value we might try to insert.† If we insert a, b, c, and
          d, in that order, into an initially empty table, we find a goes into bucket 3, b into 0
          and c into 4. When we try to insert d, we first try h(d) = 3 and find it filled. Then we



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (20 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          try h1(d) = 4 and find it filled as well. Finally, when we try h2(d) = 5, we find an
          empty space and put d there. The resulting positions are shown in Fig. 4.13.




                                             Fig. 4.13. Partially filled hash table.

               The membership test for an element x requires that we examine h(x), hi(x), h2(x), .
          . . , until we either find x or find an empty bucket. To see why we can stop looking if
          we reach an empty bucket, suppose first that there are no deletions permitted. If, say,
          h3(x) is the first empty bucket found in the series, it is not possible that x is in bucket
          h4(x), h5(x), or further along the sequence, because x could not have been placed there
          unless h3(x) were filled at the time we inserted x.

              Note, however, that if we allow deletions, then we can never be sure, if we reach
          an empty bucket without finding x, that x is not somewhere else, and the now empty
          bucket was occupied when x was inserted. When we must do deletions, the most
          effective approach is to place a constant called deleted into a bucket that holds an
          element that we wish to delete. It is important that we can distinguish between deleted
          and empty, the constant found in all buckets that have never been filled. In this way it
          is possible to permit deletions without having to search the entire table during a
          MEMBER test. When inserting we can treat deleted as an available space, so with
          luck the space of a deleted element will eventually be reused. However, as the space
          of a deleted element is not immediately reclaimable as it is with open hashing, we
          may prefer the open to the closed scheme.

          Example 4.4. Suppose we wish to test if e is in the set represented by Fig. 4.13. If
          h(e) = 4, we try buckets 4, 5, and then 6. Bucket 6 is empty and since we have not
          found e, we conclude e is not in the set.

             If we delete c, we must put the constant deleted in bucket 4. In that way, when we
          look for d, and we begin at h(d) = 3, we shall scan 4 and 5 to find d, and not stop at 4
          as we would if we put empty in that bucket.

             In Fig 4.14 we see the type declarations and operations for the DICTIONARY
          ADT with set members of type nametype and the closed hash table as the underlying
          implementation. We use an arbitrary hash function h, of which Fig. 4.11 is one
          possibility, and we use the linear hashing strategy to rehash in case of collisions. For



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (21 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          convenience, we have identified empty with a string of ten blanks and deleted with a
          string of 10 *'s, assuming that neither of these strings could be real keys. (In the SPIT
          database these strings are unlikely to be names of legislators.) The procedure
          INSERT(x, A ) first uses locate to determine if x is already in A, and, if not, it uses a
          special routine locate 1 to find a location in which to insert x. Note that locate 1
          searches for deleted as well as empty locations.


               const
                  empty = ' '; { 10 blanks }
                  deleted = '**********'{ 10 *'s }
               type
                  DICTIONARY = array[0..B -1] of nametype;
               procedure MAKENULL ( var A: DICTIONARY );
                  var
                     i: integer;
                  begin
                     for i := 0 to B - 1 do
                           A [i] := empty
                  end; {MAKENULL}
               function locate ( x: nametype; A: DICTIONARY ) : integer;
                  { locate scans DICTIONARY from the bucket for h(x) until
                    either x is found, or an empty bucket is found, or it has
                    scanned completely around the table, thereby determining
                    that the table does not contain x. locate returns the index
                    of the bucket at which it stops for any of these reasons }
                  var
                     initial, i: integer;
                  { initial holds h(x); i counts the number of
                        buckets thus far scanned when looking for x }
                  begin
                     initial := h(x);
                     i := 0;
                     while (i < B) and (A [(initial +
          i) mod B ] <> x) and
                           (A [(initial + i) mod B] <>
          empty) do
                                 i := i + 1;
                     return ((initial + i) mod B)
                  end; { locate }
               function locate 1 ( x: nametype; A: DICTIONARY ) : integer;
                  { like locate, but it will also stop at and return a deleted entry }
               function MEMBER ( x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY ) :



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (22 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          boolean;
                   begin
                         if A [locate(x)] = x then
                                 return (true)
                         else
                                 return (false)
                    end; { MEMBER }
                procedure INSERT (x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY );
                    var
                       bucket: integer;
                begin
                    if A[locate (x)] = x then return; { x
          is already in A }
                    bucket := locate 1(x);
                    if (A [bucket] = empty) or (A
          [bucket] = deleted) then
                           A [bucket] := x
                    else
                           error('INSERT failed: table is full')
                end; { INSERT }
                procedure DELETE ( x: nametype; var A: DICTIONARY );
                    var
                           bucket: integer;
                    begin
                           bucket := locate(x);
                           if A [bucket] = x then
                                 A [bucket] := deleted
                end; { DELETE }

                            Fig. 4.14. Dictionary implementation by a closed hash table.


          4.8 Estimating the Efficiency of Hash
          Functions
          As we have mentioned, hashing is an efficient way to represent dictionaries and some
          other abstract data types based on sets. In this section we shall examine the average
          time per dictionary operation in an open hash table. If there are B buckets and N
          elements stored in the hash table, then the average bucket has N/B members, and we
          expect that an average INSERT, DELETE, or MEMBER operation will take O(1 +
          N/B) time. The constant 1 represents the time to find the bucket, and N/B the time to
          search the bucket. If we can choose B to be about N, this time becomes a constant per



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (23 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          operation. Thus the average time to insert, delete, or test an element for membership,
          assuming the element is equally likely to be hashed to any bucket, is a constant
          independent of N.

             Suppose we are given a program written in some language like Pascal, and we
          wish to insert all identifiers appearing in the program into a hash table. Whenever a
          declaration of a new identifier is encountered, the identifier is inserted into the hash
          table after checking that it is not already there. During this phase it is reasonable to
          assume that an identifier is equally likely to be hashed into any given bucket. Thus we
          can construct a hash table with N elements in time O(N(1 + N/B)). By choosing B
          equal to N this becomes O(N).

              In the next phase identifiers are encountered in the body of the program. We must
          locate the identifiers in the hash table to retrieve information associated with them.
          But what is the expected time to locate an identifier? If the element searched for is
          equally likely to be any element in the table, then the expected time to search for it is
          just the average time spent inserting an element. To see this, observe that in searching
          once for each element in the table, the time spent is exactly the same as the time spent
          inserting each element, assuming that elements are always appended to the end of the
          list for the appropriate bucket. Thus the expected time for a search is also 0(1 + N/B).

             The above analysis assumes that a hash function distributes elements uniformly
          over the buckets. Do such functions exist? We can regard a function such as that of
          Fig. 4.11 (convert characters to integers, sum and take the remainder modulo B) as a
          typical hash function. The following example examines the performance of this hash
          function.

          Example 4.5. Suppose we use the hash function of Fig. 4.11 to hash the 100 keys
          consisting of the character strings A0, A1, . . . , A99 into a table of 100 buckets. On
          the assumption that ord(O), ord(1), . . . , ord(9) form an arithmetic progression, as
          they do in the common character codes ASCII and EBCDIC, it is easy to check that
          the keys hash into at most 29 of the 100 buckets,† and the largest bucket contains
          A18, A27, A36, . . . , A90, or 9 of the 100 elements. If we compute the average
          number of steps for insertion, using the fact that the insertion of the ith element into a
          bucket takes i + 1 steps, we get 395 steps for these 100 keys. In comparison, our
          estimate N(1 + N/B) would suggest 200 steps.

             The simple hashing function of Fig. 4.11 may treat certain sets of inputs, such as
          the consecutive strings in Example 4.5, in a nonrandom manner. "More random" hash
          functions are available. As an example, we can use the idea of squaring and taking
          middle digits. Thus, if we have a 5-digit number n as a key and square it, we get a 9
          or 10 digit number. The "middle digits," such as the 4th through 7th places from the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (24 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          right, have values that depend on almost all the digits of n. For example, digit 4
          depends on all but the leftmost digit of n, and digit 5 depends on all digits of n. Thus,
          if B = 100, we might choose to take digits 6 and 5 to form the bucket number.

             This idea can be generalized to situations where B is not a power of 10. Suppose
          keys are integers in the range 0, 1, . . . , K. If we pick an integer C such that BC2 is
          about equal to K2, then the function

                                                        h(n) = [n2/C] mod B

          effectively extracts a base-B digit from the middle of n2.

          Example 4.6. If K = 1000 and B = 8, we might choose C = 354. Then




              To use the "square and take the middle" strategy when keys are character strings,
          first group the characters in the string from the right into blocks of a fixed number of
          characters, say 4, padding the left with blanks, if necessary. Treat each block as a
          single integer, formed by concatenating the binary codes for the characters. For
          example, ASCII uses a 7-bit character code, so characters may be viewed as "digits"
          in base 27, or 128. Thus we can regard the character string abcd as the integer (128)3a
          + (128)2b + (128)c + d. After converting all blocks to integers, add them† and
          proceed as we have suggested previously for integers.


          Analysis of Closed Hashing
          In a closed hashing scheme the speed of insertion and other operations depends not
          only on how randomly the hash function distributes the elements into buckets, but
          also on how well the rehashing strategy avoids additional collisions when a bucket is
          already filled. For example, the linear strategy for resolving collisions is not as good
          as possible. While the analysis is beyond the scope of this book, we can observe the
          following. As soon as a few consecutive buckets are filled, any key that hashes to one
          of them will be sent, by the rehash strategy, to the end of the group, thereby
          increasing the length of that consecutive group. We are thus likely to find more long
          runs of consecutive buckets that are filled than if elements filled buckets at random.
          Moreover, runs of filled blocks cause some long sequences of tries before a newly
          inserted element finds an empty bucket, so having unusually large runs of filled



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (25 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          buckets slows down insertion and other operations.

              We might wish to know how many tries (or probes) are necessary on the average
          to insert an element when N out of B buckets are filled, assuming all combinations of
          N out of B buckets are equally likely to be filled. It is generally assumed, although not
          proved, that no closed hashing strategy can give a better average time performance
          than this for the dictionary operations. We shall then derive a formula for the cost of
          insertion if the alternative locations used by the rehashing strategy are chosen at
          random. Finally, we shall consider some strategies for rehashing that approximate
          random behavior.

              The probability of a collision on our initial probe is N/B. Assuming a collision, our
          first rehash will try one of B - 1 buckets, of which N - 1 are filled, so the probability

          of at least two collisions is                          Similarly, the probability of at least i collisions
          is




             If B and N are large, this probability approximates (N/B)i. The average number of
                probes is one (for the successful insertion) plus the sum over all i ≥ 1 of the

          probability of at least i collisions, that is, approximately                 . It can
          be shown that the exact value of the summation when formula (4.3) is substituted for

          (N/B)i is                 , so our approximation is a good one except when N is very close to
                                                            B.


             Observe that           grows very slowly as N begins to grow from 0 to B - 1, the
          largest value of N for which another insertion is possible. For example, if N is half B,
          then about two probes are needed for the next insertion, on the average. The average

          insertion cost per bucket to fill M of the B buckets is                                        , which is

          approximately                    , or                 Thus, to fill the table completely
          (M = B) requires an average of logeB per bucket, or B logeB probes in total. However,
          to fill the table to 90% of capacity (M = .9B) only requires B((10/9) logel0) or
          approximately 2.56B probes.

              The average cost of the membership test for a nonexistent element is the same as



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (26 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          the cost of inserting the next element, but the cost of the membership test for an
          element in the set is the average cost of all insertions made so far, which is
          substantially less if the table is fairly full. Deletions have the same average cost as
          membership testing. But unlike open hashing, deletions from a closed hash table do
          not help speed up subsequent insertions or membership tests. It should be emphasized
          that if we never fill closed hash tables to more than any fixed fraction less than one,
          the average cost of operations is a constant; the constant grows as the permitted
          fraction of capacity grows. Figure 4.15 graphs the cost of insertions, deletions and
          membership tests, as a function of the percentage of the table that is full at the time
          the operation is performed.




                                               Fig. 4.15. Average operation cost.


          "Random" Strategies for Collision
          Resolution
          We have observed that the linear rehashing strategy tends to group full buckets into
          large consecutive blocks. Perhaps we could get more "random" behavior if we probed
          at a constant interval greater than one. That is, let hi(x) = (h(x)+ci) mod B for some c
          > 1. For example, if B = 8, c = 3, and h(x) = 4, we would probe buckets 4, 7, 2, 5, 0, 3,
          6, and 1, in that order. Of course, if c and B have a common factor greater than one,
          this strategy doesn't even allow us to search all buckets; try B = 8 and c = 2, for
          example. But more significantly, even if c and B are relatively prime (have no
          common factors), we have the same "bunching up" problem as with linear hashing,
          although here it is sequences of full buckets separated by difference c that tend to
          occur. This phenomenon slows down operations as for linear hashing, since an
          attempted insertion into a full bucket will tend to travel down a chain of full buckets
          separated by distance c, and the length of this chain will increase by one.

             In fact, any rehashing strategy where the target of a probe depends only on the
          target of the previous probe (as opposed to depending on the number of unsuccessful
          probes so far, the original bucket h(x), or the value of the key x itself) will exhibit the
          bunching property of linear hashing. Perhaps the simplest strategy in which the
          problem does not occur is to let hi(x) = (h(x)+di) mod B where d1, d2, . . . , dB-1 is a
          "random" permutation of the integers 1, 2, . . . , B-1. Of course, the same sequence d1,



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (27 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          . . . , dB-1 is used for all insertions, deletions and membership tests; the "random"
          shuffle of the integers is decided upon once, when we design the rehash algorithm.

              The generation of "random" numbers is a complicated subject, but fortunately,
          many common methods do produce a sequence of "random" numbers that is actually
          a permutation of integers from 1 up to some limit. These random number generators,
          if reset to their initial values for each operation on the hash table, serve to generate the
          desired sequence d1, . . . , dB-1.

              One effective approach uses "shift register sequences." Let B be a power of 2 and k
          a constant between 1 and B-1. Start with some number d1 in the range 1 to B - 1, and
          generate successive numbers in the sequence by taking the previous value, doubling
          it, and if the result exceeds B, subtracting B and taking the bitwise modulo 2 sum of
          the result and the selected constant k. The bitwise modulo 2 sum of x and y, written x
          ⊕ y, is computed by writing x and y in binary, with leading 0's if necessary so both
          are of the same length, and forming the numbers whose binary representation has a 1
          in those positions where one, but not both, of x and y have a 1.

          Example 4.7. 25 ⊕ 13 is computed by taking

                                                                      25 = 11001

                                                                      13 = 01101

                                                                         ______

                                                           25 ⊕ 13 = 10100

          Note that this "addition" can be thought of as ordinary binary addition with carries
          from place to place ignored.

              Not every value of k will produce a permutation of 1, 2, . . . , B-1; sometimes a
          number repeats before all are generated. However, for given B, there is a small but
          finite chance that any particular k will work, and we need only find one k for each B.

          Example 4.8. Let B = 8. If we pick k = 3, we succeed in generating all of 1, 2, . . . , 7.
          For example, if we start with d1 = 5, then we compute d2 by first doubling d1 to get
          10. Since 10 > 8, we subtract 8 to get 2, and then compute d2 = 2 ⊕ 3 = 1. Note that x
          ⊕ 3 can be computed by complementing the last two bits of x.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (28 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




             It is instructive to see the 3-bit binary representations of d1, d2, . . . , d7. These are
          shown in Fig. 4.16, along with the method of their calculation. Note that
          multiplication by 2 corresponds to a shift left in binary. Thus we have a hint of the
          origin of the term "shift register sequence."




                                     Fig. 4.16. Calculating a shift register sequence.

             The reader should check that we also generate a permutation of 1, 2, . . . ,7 if we
          choose k = 5, but we fail for other values of k.


          Restructuring Hash Tables
          If we use an open hash table, the average time for operations increases as N/B, a
          quantity that grows rapidly as the number of elements exceeds the number of buckets.
          Similarly, for a closed hash table, we saw from Fig. 4.15 that efficiency goes down as
          N approaches B, and it is not possible that N exceeds B.

             To retain the constant time per operation that is theoretically possible with hash
          tables, we suggest that if N gets too large, for example N ≥ .9B for a closed table or N
          ≥ 2B for an open one, we simply create a new hash table with twice as many buckets.
          The insertion of the current members of the set into the new table will, on the
          average, take less time than it took to insert them into the smaller table, and we more
          than make up this cost when doing subsequent dictionary operations.


          4.9 Implementation of the Mapping ADT
          Recall our discussion of the MAPPING ADT from Chapter 2 in which we defined a
          mapping as a function from domain elements to range elements. The operations for
          this ADT are:

               1. MAKENULL(A) initializes the mapping A by making each domain element
                  have no assigned range value.

               2. ASSIGN(A, d, r) defines A(d) to be r.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (29 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




               3. COMPUTE(A, d, r) returns true and sets r to A(d) if A(d) is defined; false is
                  returned otherwise.

              The hash table is an effective way to implement a mapping. The operations
          ASSIGN and COMPUTE are implemented much like INSERT and MEMBER
          operations for a dictionary. Let us consider an open hash table first. We assume the
          hash function h(d) hashes domain elements to bucket numbers. While for the
          dictionary, buckets consisted of a linked list of elements, for the mapping we need a
          list of domain elements paired with their range values. That is, we replace the cell
          definition in Fig. 4.12 by

                   type
                      celltype = record
                         domainelement: domaintype;
                         range: rangetype;
                         next: ↑ celltype
                      end

          where domaintype and rangetype are whatever types domain and range
          elements have in this mapping. The declaration of a MAPPING is

                   type
                           MAPPING = array[0..B-1] of ↑ celltype

          This array is the bucket array for a hash table. The procedure ASSIGN is written in
          Fig. 4.17. The code for MAKENULL and COMPUTE are left as an exercise.

             Similarly, we can use a closed hash table as a mapping. Define cells to consist of
          domain element and range fields and declare a MAPPING to be an array of cells. As
          for open hash tables, let the hash function apply to domain elements, not range
          elements. We leave the implementation of the mapping operations for a closed hash
          table as an exercise.


          4.10 Priority Queues
          The priority queue is an ADT based on the set model with the operations INSERT
          and DELETEMIN, as well as the usual MAKENULL for initialization of the data
          structure. To define the new operation, DELETEMIN, we first assume that elements
          of the set have a "priority" function defined on




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (30 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                procedure ASSIGN ( var A: MAPPING; d: domaintype;
          r: rangetype );
                  var
                     bucket: integer;
                     current: ↑ celltype;
                  begin
                     bucket := h(d);
                     current := A[bucket];
                     while current <> nil do
                       if current↑.domainelement = d then begin
                           current↑.range := r;
          { replace old value for d }
                           return
                       end
                       else
                           current := current↑.next;
                     { at this point, d was not found on the list }
                     current := A[bucket]; { use current to remember first cell
          }
                     new(A[bucket]);
                     A [bucket]↑.domainelement
          := d;
                     A [bucket]↑.range: =
          r;
                     A [bucket]↑.next :=
          current
                end; { ASSIGN }

                              Fig. 4.17. The procedure ASSIGN for an open hash table.

          them; for each element a, p(a), the priority of a, is a real number or, more generally, a
          member of some linearly ordered set. The operation INSERT has the usual meaning,
          while DELETEMIN is a function that returns some element of smallest priority and,
          as a side effect, deletes it from the set. Thus, as its name implies, DELETEMIN is a
          combination of the operations DELETE and MIN discussed earlier in the chapter.

          Example 4.9. The term "priority queue" comes from the following sort of use for this
          ADT. The word "queue" suggests that people or entities are waiting for some service,
          and the word "priority" suggests that the service is given not on a "first-come-first-
          served" basis as for the QUEUE ADT, but rather that each person has a priority based
          on the urgency of need. An example is a hospital waiting room, where patients having
          potentially fatal problems will be taken before any others, no matter how long the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (31 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          respective waits are.

             As a more mundane example of the use of priority queues, a time- shared
          computing system needs to maintain a set of processes waiting for service. Usually,
          the system designers want to make short processes appear to be instantaneous (in
          practice, response within a second or two appears instantaneous), so these are given
          priority over processes that have already consumed substantial time. A process that
          requires several seconds of computing time cannot be made to appear instantaneous,
          so it is sensible strategy to defer these until all processes that have a chance to appear
          instantaneous have been done. However, if we are not careful, processes that have
          taken substantially more time than average may never get another time slice and will
          wait forever.

              One possible way to favor short processes, yet not lock out long ones is to give
          process P a priority 100tused(P) - tinit(P). The parameter tused gives the amount of
          time consumed by the process so far, and tinit gives the time at which the process
          initiated, measured from some "time zero." Note that priorities will generally be large
          negative integers, unless we choose to measure tinit from a time in the future. Also
          note that 100 in the above formula is a "magic number"; it is selected to be somewhat
          larger than the largest number of processes we expect to be active at once. The reader
          may observe that if we always pick the process with the smallest priority number, and
          there are not too many short processes in the mix, then in the long run, a process that
          does not finish quickly will receive 1% of the processor's time. If that is too much or
          too little, another constant can replace 100 in the priority formula.

             We shall represent processes by records consisting of a process identifier and a
          priority number. That is, we define

                   type
                      processtype = record
                         id: integer;
                         priority: integer
                      end;

          The priority of a process is the value of the priority field, which here we have defined
          to be an integer. We can define the priority function as follows.

                   function p ( a: processtype ): integer;
                      begin
                          return (a.priority)
                      end;




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (32 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




             In selecting processes to receive a time slice, the system maintains a priority queue
          WAITING of processtype elements and uses two procedures, initial and select, to
          manipulate the priority queue by the operations INSERT and DELETEMIN.
          Whenever a process is initiated, procedure initial is called to place a record for that
          process in WAITING. Procedure select is called when the system has a time slice to
          award to some process. The record for the selected process is deleted from
          WAITING, but retained by select for reentry into the queue with a new priority; the
          priority is increased by 100 times the amount of time used.

             We make use of function currenttime, which returns the current time, in whatever
          time units are used by the system, say microseconds, and we use procedure
          execute(P) to cause the process with identifier P to execute for one time slice. Figure
          4.18 shows the procedures initial and select.



                 procedure initial ( P: integer );
                  { initial places process with id P on the queue }
                  var
                     process: processtype;
                  begin
                     process.id := P;
                     process.priority := - currenttime;
                     INSERT (process, WAITING)
                  end; { initial }

               procedure select;
                 { select allocates a time slice to process with highest priority }
                 var
                    begintime, endtime: integer;
                    process: processtype;
                 begin
                    process := ↑ DELETEMIN(WAITING);
                          { DELETEMIN returns a pointer to the deleted element }
                    begintime := currenttime;
                    execute (process.id);
                    endtime := currenttime;
                    process.priority := process.priority + 100*(endtime -
          begintime);
                          { adjust priority to incorporate amount of time used }
                    INSERT (process, WAITING)
                          { put selected process back on queue with new priority }
                 end; { select }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (33 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                                           Fig. 4.18. Allocating time to processes.


          4.11 Implementations of Priority Queues
          With the exception of the hash table, the set implementations we have studied so far
          are also appropriate for priority queues. The reason the hash table is inappropriate is
          that there is no convenient way to find the minimum element, so hashing merely adds
          complications, and does not improve performance over, say, a linked list.

             If we use a linked list, we have a choice of sorting it or leaving it unsorted. If we
          sort the list, finding a minimum is easy -- just take the first element on the list.
          However, insertion requires scanning half the list on the average to maintain the
          sorted list. On the other hand, we could leave the list unsorted, which makes insertion
          easy and selection of a minimum more difficult.

          Example 4.10. We shall implement DELETEMIN for an unsorted list of elements of
          type processtype, as defined in Example 4.9. The list is headed by an empty cell. The
          implementations of INSERT and MAKENULL are straightforward, and we leave the
          implementation using sorted lists as an exercise. Figure 4.19 gives the declaration for
          cells, for the type PRIORITYQUEUE, and for the procedure DELETEMIN.


          Partially Ordered Tree Implementation of
          Priority Queues
          Whether we choose sorted or unsorted lists to represent priority queues, we must
          spend time proportional to n to implement one or the other of INSERT or
          DELETEMIN on sets of size n. There is another implementation in which
          DELETEMIN and INSERT each require O(logn) steps, a substantial improvement for
          large n (say n ≥ 100). The basic idea is to organize the elements of the priority queue
          in a binary tree that is as balanced as possible; an example is in Fig. 4.20. At the
          lowest level, where some leaves may be missing, we require that all missing leaves
          are to the right of all leaves that are present on the lowest level.

              Most importantly, the tree is partially ordered, meaning that the priority of node v
          is no greater than the priority of the children of v, where the priority of a node is the
          priority number of the element stored at the node. Note from Fig. 4.20 that small
          priority numbers need not appear at higher levels than larger priority numbers. For
          example, level three has 6 and 8, which are less than the priority number 9 appearing
          on level 2. However, the parent of 6 and 8 has priority 5, which is, and must be, at
          least as small as the priorities of its children.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (34 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




              To execute DELETEMIN, we return the minimum-priority element, which, it is
          easily seen, must be at the root. However, if we simply remove the root, we no longer
          have a tree. To maintain the property of being a partially ordered tree, as balanced as
          possible, with leaves at the lowest level as far left as can be, we take the rightmost
          leaf at the lowest level and temporarily put it at the root. Figure 4.21(a) shows this
          change from Fig. 4.20. Then we push this element as far down the tree as it will go,
          by exchanging it with the one of its children having smaller priority, until the element
          is either at a leaf or at a position where it has priority no larger than either of its
          children.

             In Fig. 4.21(a) we must exchange the root with its smaller-priority child, which has
          priority 5. The result is shown in Fig. 4.21(b). The element being pushed down is still
          larger than its children, with priorities 6 and 8. We exchange it with the smaller of
          these, 6, to reach the tree of Fig. 4.21(c). This tree has the partially ordered property.

              In this percolation, if a node v has an element with priority a, if its children have
          elements with priorities b and c, and if at least one of b and c is smaller than a, then
          exchanging a with the smaller of b and c results in v having an element whose priority
          is smaller than either of its children. To prove this, suppose b ≤ c. After the exchange,
          node v acquires b, and its



                 type
                   celltype = record
                      element: processtype;
                      next: ↑ celltype
                   end;
                   PRIORITYQUEUE = ↑ celltype;
                      { cell pointed to is a list header }

               function DELETEMIN ( var A: PRIORITYQUEUE ): ↑ celltype;
                 var
                    current: ↑ celltype; { cell before one being
          "scanned" }
                    lowpriority: integer; { smallest priority found so far }
                    prewinner: ↑ celltype; { cell before one with
          element
                       of smallest priority }
                 begin
                    if A ↑.next = nil
          then



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (35 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                          error('cannot find minimum of empty list')
                    else begin
                      lowpriority := p(A↑.next↑.element);
                       { p returns priority of the first element. Note A points
                          to a header cell that does not contain an element }
                      prewinner := A;
                      current := A↑.next;
                      while current↑.next <>
          nil do begin
                        { compare priorities of current winner
                                and next element }
                        if p( current↑.next↑.element) <
          lowpriority then begin
                                prewinner := current;
                                lowpriority : = p (current↑.next↑. element)
                        end;
                        current := current↑.next
                      end;
                      DELETEMIN := prewinner↑.next;
                          { return pointer to the winner }
                      prewinner↑.next :=
          prewinner↑.next↑.next
                          { remove winner from list }
                      end
                    end; { DELETEMIN }

                                 Fig. 4.19. Linked list priority queue implementation.

          children hold a and c. We assumed b ≤ c, and we were told that a is larger than at
          least one of b and c. Therefore b ≤ a surely holds. Thus the insertion procedure
          outlined above percolates an element down the tree until there




                                               Fig. 4.20. A partially ordered tree.

          are no more violations of the partially ordered property.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (36 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




             Let us also observe that DELETEMIN applied to a set of n elements takes O(logn)
          time. This follows since no path in the tree has more than 1 + logn nodes, and the
          process of forcing an element down the tree takes a constant time per node. Observe
          that for any constant c, the quantity c(1+logn) is at most 2clogn for n ≥ 2. Thus
          c(1+logn) is O(logn).

              Now let us consider how INSERT should work. First, we place the new element as
          far left as possible on the lowest level, starting a new level if the current lowest level
          is all filled. Fig. 4.22(a) shows the result of placing an element with priority 4 into
          Fig. 4.20. If the new element has priority lower than its parent, exchange it with its
          parent. The new element is now at a position where it is of lower priority than either
          of its children, but it may also be of lower priority than its parent, in which case we
          must exchange it with its parent, and repeat the process, until the new element is
          either at the root or has larger priority than its parent. Figures 4.22(b) and (c) show
          how 4 moves up by this process.

             We could prove that the above steps result in a partially ordered tree. While we
          shall not attempt a rigorous proof, let us observe that an element with priority a can
          become the parent of an element with priority b in three ways. (In what follows, we
          identify an element with its priority.)

               1. a is the new element and moves up the tree replacing the old parent of b. Let
                  the old parent of b have priority c. Then a < c, else the exchange would not
                  take place. But c ≤ b, since the original tree was partially ordered. Thus a < b.
                  For example in Fig. 4.22(c) 4 became the parent of 6, replacing a parent of
                  larger priority, 5.

               2. a was pushed down the tree due to an exchange with the new element. In this
                  case a must have been an ancestor of b in the original partially ordered tree.
                  Thus a ≤ b. For example, in Fig. 4.22(c), 5 becomes the




                                            Fig. 4.21. Pushing an element down the tree.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (37 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                                                      Fig. 4.22. Inserting an element.

                    parent of elements with priority 8 and 9. Originally, 5 was the parent of the
                    former and the "grandparent" of the latter.

               3. b might be the new element, and it moves up to become a child of a. If a > b,
                  then a and b will be exchanged at the next step, so this violation of the
                  partially ordered property will be removed.

             The time to perform an insertion is proportional to the distance up the tree that the
          new element travels. As for DELETEMIN, we observe that this distance can be no
          greater than 1 + logn, so both INSERT and DELETEMIN take O(log n) steps.


          An Array Implementation of Partially
          Ordered Trees
          The fact that the trees we have been considering are binary, balanced as much as
          possible, and have leaves at the lowest level pushed to the left means that we can use
          a rather unusual representation for these trees, called a heap. If there are n nodes, we
          use the first n positions of an array A. A [1] holds the root. The left child of the node
          in A[i], if it exists, is at A [2i], and the right child, if it exists, is at A [2i + 1]. An
          equivalent viewpoint is that the parent of A [i] is A [i div 2], for i > 1. Still another
          equivalent observation is that the nodes of a tree fill up A[1], A[2], . . . , A [n] level-by-
          level, from the top, and within a level, from the left. For example, Fig. 4.20
          corresponds to an array containing the elements 3, 5, 9, 6, 8, 9, 10, 10, 18, 9.

             We can declare a priority queue of elements of some type, say processtype as in
          Example 4.9, to consist of an array of processtype and an integer last, indicating the
          currently last element of the array that is in use. If we assume maxsize is the desired
          size of arrays for a priority queue, we can declare:



                 type
                   PRIORITYQUEUE = record
                      contents: array[1..maxsize] of processtype;
                      last: integer
                   end;

                 The priority queue operations are implemented below in Fig. 4.23.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (38 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                 procedure MAKENULL ( var A: PRIORITYQUEUE );
                  begin
                     A .last := 0
                  end; { MAKENULL }

              procedure INSERT ( x: processtype; var A:
          PRIORITYQUEUE );
               var
                  i: integer;
                  temp : processtype;
               begin
                  if A .last >= maxsize then
                  error ('priority queue is full')

               else begin
                  A .last := A .last + 1;
                  A .contents [A .last] := x;
                  i := A .last; { i is index of current position of x }
                  while (i > 1) and†
          (p(A .contents[i]) < p(A .contents[i
          div 2])) do
                      begin { push x up the tree by exchanging it with its parent
                         of larger priority. Recall p computes the priority of
                         a processtype element }
                      temp := A .contents [i];
                      A .contents [i] := A .contents [i
          div 2];
                      A .contents [i div 2] := temp;
                      i := i div 2
                  end
               end
             end; { INSERT }

              function DELETEMIN ( var A: PRIORITYQUEUE ): ↑ processtype;
                 var
                     i, j: integer;
                     temp : processtype;
                     minimum: ↑ processtype;
                 begin
                     if A .last = 0 then
                            error('priority queue is empty')
                 else begin
                     new (minimum);



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (39 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                        minimum ↑ := A .contents
          [1];
                        { we shall return a pointer to a copy of the root of A }
                     A .contents [1] := A .contents [A .last];
                     A .last := A .last - 1;
                        { move the last element to the beginning }
                     i := 1; { i is the current position of the old last element }
                     while i < = A .last div 2 do begin
                        { push old last element down tree }
                        if (p (A .contents [2*i]) < p
          (A .contents [2*i + 1]))
                            or (2*i = A.last) then
                                  j := 2 * i
                        else
                            j := 2 * i + 1;
                        { j will be the child of i having the smaller priority
                            or if 2*i = A.last, then j is the only child of i }
                        if p (A .contents [i]) > p (A
          .contents [j]) then begin
                            { exchange old last element with smaller priority child }

                           temp := A.contents[i];
                           A.contents[i] := A.contents[j];
                           A.contents[j] := temp;
                           i := j
                        end
                        else
                           return (minimum) { cannot push further }
                      end;
                      return (minimum) { pushed all the way to a leaf }
                   end
                 end; { DELETEMIN }

                                   Fig. 4.23. Array implementation of priority queue.


          4.12 Some Complex Set Structures
          In this section we consider two more complex uses of sets to represent data. The first
          problem is that of representing many-many relationships, as might occur in a database
          system. A second case study exhibits how a pair of data structures representing the
          same object (a mapping in our example) can be a more efficient representation than
          either acting alone.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (40 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          Many-Many Relationships and the
          Multilist Structure
          An example of a many-many relationship between students and courses is suggested
          in Fig. 4.24. It is called a "many-many" relationship because there can be many
          students taking each course and many courses taken by each student.




                        Fig. 4.24. An example relationship between students and courses.

             From time to time the registrar may wish to insert or delete students from courses,
          to determine which students are taking a given course, or to know which courses a
          given student is taking. The simplest data structure with which these questions can be
          answered is obvious; just use the 2-dimensional array suggested by Fig. 4.24, where
          the value 1 (or true) replaces the X's and 0 (or false) replaces the blanks.

             For example, to insert a student into a course, we need a mapping, MS, perhaps
          implemented as a hash table, that translates student names into array indices, and
          another, MC, that translates course names into array indices. Then, to insert student s
          into course c, we simply set

                   Enrollment[MS(s ), MC(c)] := 1.

          Deletions are performed by setting this element to 0. To find the courses taken by the
          student with name s, run across the row MS(s), and similarly run down the column
          MC(c) find the students in course c.

              Why might we wish to look further for a more appropriate data structure?
          Consider a large university with perhaps 1000 courses and 20,000 students, taking an
          average of three courses each. The array suggested by Fig. 4.24 would have
          20,000,000 elements, of which 60,000, or 0.3%, would be 1. † Such an array, which
          is called sparse to indicate that almost all its elements are zero, can be represented in
          far less space if we simply list the nonzero entries. Moreover, we can spend a great
          deal of time scanning a column of 20,000 entries searching for, on the average, 60
          that are nonzero; row scans take considerable time as well.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (41 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




             One way to do better is to begin by phrasing the problem as one of maintaining a
          collection of sets. Two of these sets are S and C, the sets of all students and all
          courses. Each element of S is actually a record of a type such as

                   type
                      studenttype = record
                         id: integer;
                         name: array[l..30] of char;
                      end

          and we would invent a similar record type for courses. To implement the structure we
          have in mind, we need a third set of elements, E, standing for enrollments. The
          elements of E each represent one of the boxes in the array of Fig. 4.24 in which there
          is an X. The E elements are records of a fixed type. As of now, we don't know any
          fields that belong in these records‡, although we shall soon learn of them. For the
          moment, let us simply postulate that there is an enrollment record for each X-entry in
          the array and that enrollment records are distinguishable from one another somehow.

             We also need sets that represent the answers to the crucial questions: given a
          student or course, what are the related courses or students, respectively. It would be
          nice if for each student s there were a set Cs of all the courses s was taking and
          conversely, a set Sc of the students taking course c.

          Such sets would be hard to implement because there would be no limit on the number
          of sets any element could be in, forcing us to complicate student and course records.
          We could instead let Sc and Cs be sets of pointers to course and student records, rather
          than the records themselves, but there is a method that saves a significant fraction of
          the space and allows equally fast answers to questions about students and courses.

             Let us make each set Cs be the set of enrollment records corresponding to student s
          and some course c. That is, if we think of an enrollment as a pair (s, c), then

                   Cs = {(s, c) | s is taking course c}

          We can similarly define

                   Sc = {(s, c) | s is taking course c}

          Note the only difference in the meaning of the two set formers above is that in the
          first case s is constant and in the second c is. For example, based on Fig. 4.24, CAlex =
          {(Alex, CS101), (Alex, CS202)} and SCS101 = {(Alex, CS101), (Amy, CS101), (Ann,
          CS101)}.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (42 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          Multilist Structures
          In general, a multilist structure is any collection of cells some of which have more
          than one pointer and can therefore be on more than one list simultaneously. For each
          type of cell in a multilist structure, it is important to distinguish among pointer fields
          so we can follow one particular list and not get confused about which of several
          pointers in a particular cell we are following.

             As a case in point, we can put one pointer field in each student and course record,
          pointing to the first enrollment record in the set Cs or Sc, respectively. Each
          enrollment record needs two pointer fields, one, which we shall call cnext, for the
          next enrollment on the list for the Cs set to which it belongs and the other, snext, for
          the Sc set to which it belongs.

             It turns out that an enrollment record indicates explicitly neither the student nor the
          course that it represents. The information is implicit in the lists on which the
          enrollment record appears. Call the student and course records heading these lists the
          owners of the enrollment record. Thus, to tell what courses student s is taking, we
          must scan the enrollment records in Cs and find for each one the owner course record.
          We could do that by placing a pointer in each enrollment record to the owning course
          record, and we would also need a pointer to the owning student record.

              While we might wish to use these pointers and thereby answer questions in the
          minimum possible time, we can save substantial space† at the cost of slowing down
          some computations, if we eliminate these pointers and instead place at the end of each
          Sc list a pointer to the owning course and at the end of each Cs list a pointer to the
          owning student. Thus, each student and course record becomes part of a ring that
          includes all the enrollment records it owns. These rings are depicted in Fig. 4.25 for
          the data of Fig. 4.24. Note that each enrollment record has its cnext pointer first and
          its snext pointer second.




                                      Fig. 4.25. Multilist representation of Fig. 4.24.

          Example 4.11. To answer a question like "which students are taking CS101," we find
          the course record for CS101. How we find such a record depends on how the set of
          courses is maintained. For example, there might be a hash table containing all such



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (43 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          records, and we obtain the desired record by applying some hash function to
          "CS101".

              We follow the pointer in the CS101 record to the first enrollment record in the ring
          for CS101. This is the second enrollment record from the left. We must then find the
          student owner of this enrollment record, which we do by following cnext pointers (the
          first pointer in enrollment records) until we reach a student record.† In this case, we
          reach the third enrollment record, then the student record for Alex; we now know that
          Alex is taking CS101.

             Now we must find the next student in CS101. We do so by following the snext
          pointer (second pointer) in the second enrollment record, which leads to the fifth
          enrollment record. The cnext pointer in that record leads us directly to the owner,
          Amy, so Amy is in CS101. Finally, we follow the snext pointer in the fifth enrollment
          record to the eighth enrollment record. The ring of cnext pointers from that record
          leads to the ninth enrollment record, then to the student record for Ann, so Ann is in
          CS101. The snext pointer in the eighth enrollment record leads back to CS101, so we
          are done.

              Abstractly, we can express the operation in Example 4.11 above as

                   for each enrollment record in the set for CS101 do begin
                       s := the student owner of the enrollment record;
                       print(s)
                   end

          The above assignment to s can be elaborated as

                   f := e;
                   repeat
                        f := f↑.cnext
                   until
                        f is a pointer to a student record;
                   s := studentname field of record pointed to by f;

          where e is a pointer to the first enrollment record in the set for CS101.

             In order to implement a structure like Fig. 4.25 in Pascal, we need to have only
          one record type, with variants to cover the cases of student, course, and enrollment
          records. Pascal forces this arrangement on us since the fields cnext and snext each
          have the ability to point to different record types. This arrangement, however, does
          solve one of our other problems. It is now easy to tell what type of record we have
          reached as we travel around a ring. Figure 4.26 shows a possible declaration of the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (44 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          records and a procedure that prints the students taking a particular class.


          Dual Data Structures for Efficiency
          Often, a seemingly simple representation problem for a set or mapping presents a
          difficult problem of data structure choice. Picking one data structure for the set makes
          certain operations easy, but others take too much time, and it seems that there is no
          one data structure that makes all the operations easy. In that case, the solution often
          turns out to be the use of two or more different structures for the same set or mapping.

              Suppose we wish to maintain a "tennis ladder," in which each player is on a unique
          "rung." New players are added to the bottom, that is, the highest- numbered rung. A
          player can challenge the player on the rung above, and if the player below wins the
          match, they trade rungs. We can represent this situation as an abstract data type,
          where the underlying model is a mapping from names (character strings) to rungs
          (integers 1, 2, . . . ). The three operations we perform are

               1. ADD(name) adds the named person to the ladder at the highest-numbered
                  rung.

               2. CHALLENGE(name) is a function that returns the name of the person on rung
                  i- 1 if the named person is on rung i, i > 1.

               3. EXCHANGE(i) swaps the names of the players on rungs i and i-l, i > l.



                 type
                   stype = array[l..20] of char;
                   ctype = array[1..5] of char;
                   recordkinds = (student, course, enrollment);
                   recordtype = record
                      case kind: recordkinds of
                           student: (studentname: stype;
                             firstcourse: ↑ recordtype);
                           course: (coursename: ctype;
                             firststudent: ↑ recordtype);
                           enrollment: (cnext, snext: ↑ recordtype)
                      end;

                 procedure printstudents ( cname: ctype );
                  var



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (45 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                    c, e, f: ↑ recordtype;
                 begin
                    c := pointer to course record with c↑.coursename = cname;
                    { above depends on how course set is implemented }
                    e := c ↑.firststudent;
                    { e runs around the ring of enrollments pointed to by c }
                    while e ↑.kind =
          enrollment do begin
                       f := e;
                       repeat
                    f := f↑.cnext
                       until
                           f↑.kind = student;
                    { f now points to student owner of enrollment e ↑ }
                    writeln (f↑.studentname ) ;
                    e := e↑.snext
                 end
               end

                               Fig. 4.26. Implementation of search through a multilist.

          Notice that we have chosen to pass only the higher rung number to EXCHANGE,
          while the other two operations take a name as argument.

              We might, for example, choose an array LADDER, where LADDER[i] is the name
          of the person on rung i. If we also keep a count of the number of players, adding a
          player to the first unoccupied rung can be done in some small constant number of
          steps.

             EXCHANGE is also easy, as we simply swap two elements of the array. However,
          CHALLENGE(name) requires that we examine the entire array for the name, which
          takes O(n) time, if n is the number of players on the ladder.

              On the other hand, we might consider a hash table to represent the mapping from
          names to rungs. On the assumption that we can keep the number of buckets roughly
          proportional to the number of players, ADD takes O(1) time, on the average.
          Challenging takes O(1) time on the average to look up the given name, but O(n) time
          to find the name on the next lower-numbered rung, since the entire hash table may
          have to be searched. Exchanging requires O(n) time to find the players on rungs i and
          i - 1.

              Suppose, however, that we combine the two structures. The cells of the hash table



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (46 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          will contain pairs consisting of a name and a rung, while the array will have in
          LADDER[i] a pointer to the cell for the player on rung i as suggested in Fig. 4.27.




                                  Fig. 4.27. Combined structure for high performance.

             We can add a name by inserting into the hash table in O(1) time on the average,
          and also placing a pointer to the newly created cell into the array LADDER at a
          position marked by the cursor nextrung in Fig. 4.27. To challenge, we look up the
          name in the hash table, taking O(1) time on the average, get the rung i for the given
          player, and follow the pointer in LADDER[i-1] to the cell of the hash table for the
          player to be challenged. Consulting LADDER[i - 1] takes constant time in the worst
          case, and the lookup in the hash table takes O(1) time on the average, so
          CHALLENGE is O(1) in the average case.

            EXCHANGE(i) takes O(1) time to find the cells for the players on rungs i and i-l,
          swap the rung numbers in those cells, and swap the pointers to the two cells in
          LADDER. Thus EXCHANGE requires constant time in even the worst case.


          Exercises

                      If A = {1, 2, 3} and B = {3, 4, 5}, what are the results of

                            a. UNION(A,B, C)

                            b. INTERSECTION(A, B, C)

                            c. DIFFERENCE(A, B, C)
              4.1
                            d. MEMBER(1, A)

                            e. INSERT(1, A)

                            f. DELETE(1, A)

                            g. MIN(A)?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (47 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                      Write a procedure in terms of the basic set operations to print all the
                      elements of a (finite) set. You may assume that a procedure to print an
            *4.2      object of the element type is available. You must not destroy the set you
                      are printing. What data structures would be most suitable for implementing
                      sets in this case?

                      The bit-vector implementation of sets can be used whenever the "universal
                      set" can be translated into the integers 1 through N. Describe how this
                      translation would be done if the universal set were

                            a. the integers 0, 1, . . . , 99

                            b. the integers n through m for any n ≤ m
              4.3
                            c. the integers n, n +2, n +4, . . . , n + 2k for any n and k

                            d. the characters 'a', 'b', . . . , 'z'

                            e. arrays of two characters, each chosen from 'a' through 'z'.



                      Write MAKENULL, UNION, INTERSECTION, MEMBER, MIN,
                      INSERT, and DELETE procedures for sets represented by lists using the
              4.4
                      abstract operations for the sorted list ADT. Note that Fig. 4.5 is a procedure
                      for INTERSECTION using a specific implementation of the list ADT.

                      Repeat Exercise 4.4 for the following set implementations:

                            a. open hash table (use abstract list operations within buckets).

                            b. closed hash table with linear resolution of collisions.
              4.5
                            c. unsorted list (use abstract list operations).

                            d. fixed length array and pointer to the last position used.



                      For each of the operations and each of the implementations in Exercises 4.4
              4.6     and 4.5, give the order of magnitude for the running time of the operations
                      on sets of size n.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (48 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                      Suppose we are hashing integers with a 7-bucket hash table using the hash
                      function h(i) = i mod 7.

                            a. Show the resulting open hash table if the perfect cubes 1, 8, 27, 64,
              4.7              125, 216, 343 are inserted.

                            b. Repeat part (a) using a closed hash table with linear resolution of
                               collisions.



                      Suppose we are using a closed hash table with 5 buckets and the hashing
                      function h(i) = i mod 5. Show the hash table that results with linear
              4.8
                      resolution of collisions if the sequence 23, 48, 35, 4, 10 is inserted into an
                      initially empty table.

              4.9     Implement the mapping ADT operations using open and closed hash tables.

                      To improve the speed of operations, we may wish to replace an open hash
                      table with B1 buckets holding many more than B1 elements by another hash
            4.10
                      table with B2 buckets. Write a procedure to construct the new hash table
                      from the old, using the list ADT operations to process each bucket.

                      In Section 4.8 we discussed "random" hash functions, where hi(x), the
                      bucket to be tried after i collisions, is (h (x) + di) mod B for some sequence
                      d1, d2, . . . ,dB-1. We also suggested that one way to compute a suitable
                      sequence d 1, d2, . . . , dB-1 was to pick a constant k, an arbitrary d1 > 0, and
                      let


            4.11



                      where i > 1, B is a power of 2, and ⊕ stands for the bitwise modulo 2 sum.
                      If B = 16, find those values of k for which the sequence d1, d2, . . . , d15
                      includes all the integers 1, 2, . . . , 15.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (49 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                            a. Show the partially ordered tree that results if the integers 5, 6, 4, 9,
                               3, 1, 7 are inserted into an empty tree.
            4.12            b. What is the result of three successive DELETEMIN operations on
                               the tree from (a)?


                      Suppose we represent the set of courses by

                            a. a linked list

                            b. a hash table
            4.13
                            c. a binary search tree

                      Modify the declarations in Fig. 4.26 for each of these structures.


                      Modify the data structure of Fig. 4.26 to give each enrollment record a
            4.14      direct pointer to its student and course owners. Rewrite the procedure
                      printstudents of Fig. 4.26 to take advantage of this structure.

                      Assuming 20,000 students, 1,000 courses, and each student in an average
                      of three courses, compare the data structure of Fig. 4.26 with its
                      modification suggested in Exercise 4.14 as to

                            a. the amount of space required
            4.15
                            b. the average time to execute printstudents

                            c. the average time to execute the analogous procedure that prints the
                               courses taken by a given student.


                      Assuming the data structure of Fig. 4.26, given course record c and student
            4.16
                      record s, write procedures to insert and to delete the fact that s is taking c.

                      What, if anything, is the difference between the data structure of Exercise
            4.17      4.14 and the structure in which sets Cs and Sc are represented by lists of
                      pointers to course and student records, respectively?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (50 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




                      Employees of a certain company are represented in the company data base
                      by their name (assumed unique), employee number, and social security
            4.18      number. Suggest a data structure that lets us, given one representation of an
                      employee, find the other two representations of the same individual. How
                      fast, on the average, can you make each such operation?


          Bibliographic Notes
          Knuth [1973] is a good source for additional information on hashing. Hashing was
          developed in the mid-to-late 1950's, and Peterson [1957] is a fundamental early paper
          on the subject. Morris [1968] and Maurer and Lewis [1975] are good surveys of
          hashing.

             The multilist is a central data structure of the network-based database systems
          proposed in DBTG [1971]. Ullman [1982] provides additional information on
          database applications of structures such as these.

             The heap implementation of partially ordered trees is based on an idea in Williams
          [1964]. Priority queues are discussed further in Knuth [1973].

             Reingold [1972] discusses the computational complexity of basic set operations.
          Set-based data flow analysis techniques are treated in detail in Cocke and Allen
          [1976] and Aho and Ullman [1977].

          †Sometimes the term multiset is used for a "set with repetitions." That is, the multiset
          {1, 4, 1} has 1 (twice) and 4 (once) as members. A multiset is not a list any more than
          a set is, and thus this multiset could also have been written {4, 1, 1} or {1, 1, 4}.

          †Changes to the data structure can be made that will speed up open hashing and allow
          closed hashing to handle larger sets. We shall describe these techniques after giving
          the basic methods.

          †If the type of members of the dictionary does not suggest an appropriate value for
          empty, let each bucket have an extra one-bit field to tell whether or not it is empty.

          †Note that A2 and A20 do not necessarily hash to the same bucket, but A23 and A41,
          for example, must do so.

          †If strings can be extremely long, this addition will have to be performed modulo
          some constant c. For example, c could be one more than the largest integer obtainable



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (51 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 4: Basic Operations on Sets




          from a single block.

          †If this were a real database system, the array would be kept in secondary storage.
          However, this data structure would waste a great deal of space.

          †Note that there are probably many more enrollment records than course or student
          records, so shrinking enrollment records shrinks the total space requirement almost as
          much.

          ‡It would in practice be useful to place fields like grade or status (credit or audit) in
          enrollment records, but our original problem statement does not require this.

          †We must have some way of identifying the type of records; we shall discuss a way
          to do this momentarily.

          †We assume this and is a conditional and.

                                             Table of Contents          Go to Chapter 5




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1204.htm (52 of 52) [1.7.2001 19:04:15]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_1.gif [1.7.2001 19:04:20]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_2.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_2.gif [1.7.2001 19:04:49]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_3.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_3.gif [1.7.2001 19:04:55]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_4.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_4.gif [1.7.2001 19:05:23]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_6.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_6.gif [1.7.2001 19:05:37]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_7.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_7.gif [1.7.2001 19:05:46]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_10.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_10.gif [1.7.2001 19:05:53]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_12.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_12.gif [1.7.2001 19:06:04]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:06:21]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_16.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_16.gif [1.7.2001 19:06:37]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_18.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_18.gif [1.7.2001 19:06:46]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_19.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_19.gif [1.7.2001 19:06:51]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_20.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_20.gif [1.7.2001 19:06:54]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_21.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_21.gif [1.7.2001 19:07:11]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_22.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_22.gif [1.7.2001 19:07:31]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_23.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_23.gif [1.7.2001 19:07:36]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_24.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_24.gif [1.7.2001 19:07:44]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_25.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_25.gif [1.7.2001 19:07:59]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_29.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_29.gif [1.7.2001 19:08:17]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_31.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig3_31.gif [1.7.2001 19:08:26]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         Advanced Set
         Representation Methods
         This chapter introduces data structures for sets that permit more efficient
         implementation of common collections of set operations than those of the previous
         chapter. These structures, however, are more complex and are often only appropriate
         for large sets. All are based on various kinds of trees, such as binary search trees,
         tries, and balanced trees.


         5.1 Binary Search Trees
         We shall begin with binary search trees, a basic data structure for representing sets
         whose elements are ordered by some linear order. We shall, as usual, denote that
         order by <. This structure is useful when we have a set of elements from a universe so
         large that it is impractical to use the elements of the set themselves as indices into
         arrays. An example of such a universe would be the set of possible identifiers in a
         Pascal program. A binary search tree can support the set operations INSERT,
         DELETE, MEMBER, and MIN, taking O(logn) steps per operation on the average
         for a set of n elements.

            A binary search tree is a binary tree in which the nodes are labeled with elements
         of a set. The important property of a binary search tree is that all elements stored in
         the left subtree of any node x are all less than the element stored at x, and all elements
         stored in the right subtree of x are greater than the element stored at x. This condition,
         called the binary search tree property, holds for every node of a binary search tree,
         including the root.

            Figure 5.1 shows two binary search trees representing the same set of integers.
         Note the interesting property that if we list the nodes of a binary search tree in
         inorder, then the elements stored at those nodes are listed in sorted order.

            Suppose a binary search tree is used to represent a set. The binary search tree
         property makes testing for membership in the set simple. To determine whether x is a
         member of the set, first compare x with the element r at the root of the tree. If x = r
         we are done and the answer to the membership query is "true." If x < r, then by the
         binary search tree property, x can only




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (1 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         Fig. 5.1. Two binary search trees.

         be a descendant of the left child of the root, if x is present at all.† Similarly, if x > r,
         then x could only be at a descendant of the right child of the root.

            We shall write a simple recursive function MEMBER(x, A) to implement this
         membership test. We assume the elements of the set are of an unspecified type that
         will be called elementtype. For convenience, we assume elementtype is a type for
         which < and = are defined. If not, we must define functions LT(a, b) and EQ(a, b),
         where a and b are of type elementtype, such that LT(a, b) is true if and only if a is
         "less than" b, and EQ(a, b) is true if and only if a and b are the same.

              The type for nodes consists of an element and two pointers to other nodes:


                type
                  nodetype = record
                    element: elementtype;
                    leftchild, rightchild: ↑ nodetype
                  end;

         Then we can define the type SET as a pointer to a node, which we take to be the root
         of the binary search tree representing the set. That is:


                type
                  SET = ↑ nodetype;

         Now we can specify fully the function MEMBER, in Fig. 5.2. Notice that since SET
         and "pointer to nodetype" are synonymous, MEMBER can call itself on subtrees as if
         those subtrees represented sets. In effect, the set can be subdivided into the subset of
         members less than x and the subset of members greater than x.


                function MEMBER ( x: elementtype; A: SET ): boolean,
                   { returns true if x is in A, false otherwise }
                   begin



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (2 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                     if A = nil then
                        return (false) { x is never in Ø }
                     else if x = A ↑.element then
                        return (true)
                     else if x < A ↑.element then
                        return (MEMBER(x, A ↑.leftchild ) )
                     else { x > A ↑.element }
                        return (MEMBER(x, A ↑.rightchild ) )
                end; { MEMBER }

                                 Fig. 5.2. Testing membership in a binary search tree.

            The procedure INSERT(x, A), which adds element x to set A, is also easy to write.
         The first action INSERT must do is test whether A = nil, that is, whether the set is
         empty. If so, we create a new node to hold x and make A point to it. If the set is not
         empty, we search for x more or less as MEMBER does, but when we find a nil
         pointer during our search, we replace it by a pointer to a new node holding x. Then x
         will be in the right place, namely, the place where the function MEMBER will find it.
         The code for INSERT is shown in Fig. 5.3.

             Deletion presents some problems. First, we must locate the element x to be deleted
         in the tree. If x is at a leaf, we can delete that leaf and be done. However, x may be at
         an interior node inode, and if we simply deleted inode, we would disconnect the tree.

            If inode has only one child, as the node numbered 14 in Fig. 5.1(b), we can replace
         inode by that child, and we shall be left with the appropriate binary search tree. If
         inode has two children, as the node numbered 10 in Fig. 5.1(a), then we must find the
         lowest-valued element among the descendants of the right child.† For example, in the
         case the element 10 is deleted from Fig. 5.1(a), we must replace it by 12, the
         minimum-valued descendant of


                procedure INSERT ( x: elementtype; var A: SET );
                 { add x to set A }
                 begin
                    if A = nil then begin
                        new (A);
                        A ↑ .element: = x;
                        A ↑ .leftchild := nil;
                        A ↑ .rightchild: = nil
                    end
                    else if x < A ↑.element



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (3 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         then
                          INSERT(x, A ↑.leftchild)
                       else if x > A ↑.element
         then
                      INSERT (x, A ↑.rightchild)
                  { if x = A ↑.element, we do
         nothing; x is already in the set }
               end; { INSERT }

                               Fig. 5.3. Inserting an element into a binary search tree.

         the right child of 10.

            To write DELETE, it is useful to have a function DELETEMIN(A) that removes
         the smallest element from a nonempty tree and returns the value of the element
         removed. The code for DELETEMIN is shown in Fig. 5.4. The code for DELETE
         uses DELETEMIN and is shown in Fig. 5.5.


             function DELETEMIN ( var A: SET ): elementtype;
               { returns and removes the smallest element from set A }
             begin
               if A ↑.leftchild = nil then
         begin
                   { A points to the smallest element }
                   DELETEMIN := A ↑.element;
                   A := A ↑.rightchild
                     { replace the node pointed to by A by its right child }
               end
               else { the node pointed to by A has a left child }
                   DELETEMIN := DELETEMIN(A ↑.leftchild)
             end; { DELETEMIN }

                                          Fig. 5.4. Deleting the smallest element.

         Example 5.1. Suppose we try to delete 10 from Fig. 5.1(a). Then, in the last
         statement of DELETE we call DELETEMIN with argument a pointer to node 14.
         That pointer is the rightchild field in the root. That call results in another call to
         DELETEMIN. The argument is then a pointer to node 12; this pointer is found in the
         leftchild field of node 14. We find that 12 has no




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (4 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                procedure DELETE ( x: elementtype; var A: SET );
                  { remove x from set A }
                begin
                  if A < > nil then
                     if x < A ↑.element
         then
                        DELETE(x, A ↑.leftchild)
                    else if x > A ↑.element then
                        DELETE(x, A ↑.rightchild)
                    { if we reach here, x is at the node pointed to by A }
                    else if (A ↑.leftchild =
         nil) and (A ↑.rightchild =
         nil) then
                        A := nil { delete the leaf holding x }
                    else if A ↑.leftchild =
         nil then
                        A := A ↑.rightchild
                    else if A ↑.rightchild =
         nil then
                        A := A ↑.leftchild
                    else { both children are present }
                        A ↑.element :=
         DELETEMIN(A ↑.rightchild)
               end; { DELETE }

                                       Fig. 5.5. Deletion from a binary search tree.

         left child, so we return element 12 and make the left child for 14 be the right child of
         12, which happens to be nil. Then DELETE takes the value 12 returned by
         DELETEMIN and replaces 10 by it. The resulting tree is shown in Fig. 5.6.




                                        Fig. 5.6. Tree of Fig.5.1 after deleting 1-0.


         5.2 Time Analysis of Binary Search Tree
         Operations

http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (5 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         In this section we analyze the average behavior of various binary search tree
         operations. We show that if we insert n random elements into an initially empty
         binary search tree, then the average path length from the root to a leaf is O(logn).
         Testing for membership, therefore, takes O(logn) time.

             It is easy to see that if a binary tree of n nodes is complete (all nodes, except those
         at the lowest level have two children), then no path has more than 1+logn nodes.†
         Thus, each of the procedures MEMBER, INSERT, DELETE, and DELETEMIN
         takes O(logn) time. To see this, observe that they all take a constant amount of time
         at a node, then may call themselves recursively on at most one child. Therefore, the
         sequence of nodes at which calls are made forms a path from the root. Since that path
         is O(logn) in length, the total time spent following the path is O(logn).

            However, when we insert n elements in a "random" order, they do not necessarily
         arrange themselves into a complete binary tree. For example, if we happen to insert
         smallest first, in sorted order, then the resulting tree is a chain of n nodes, in which
         each node except the lowest has a right child but no left child. In this case, it is easy

         to show that, as it takes O(i) steps to insert the ith element, and                                                , the
         whole process of n insertions takes O(n2) steps, or O(n) steps per operation.

             We must determine whether the "average" binary search tree of n nodes is closer
         to the complete tree in structure than to the chain, that is, whether the average time
         per operation on a "random" tree takes O(logn) steps, O(n) steps, or something in
         between. As we cannot know the true frequency of insertions and deletions, or
         whether deleted elements have some special property (e.g., do we always delete the
         minimum?), we can only analyze the average path length of "random" trees if we
         make some assumptions. The particular assumptions we make are that trees are
         formed by insertions only, and all orders of the n inserted elements are equally likely.

             Under these fairly natural assumptions, we can calculate P(n), the average number
         of nodes on the path from the root to some node (not necessarily a leaf). We assume
         the tree was formed by inserting n random elements into an initially empty tree.
         Clearly P(0) = 0 and P(1) = 1. Suppose we have a list of n≥2 elements to insert into
         an empty tree. The first element on the list, call it a, is equally likely to be first,
         second, or nth in the sorted order. Suppose that i elements on the list are less than a,
         so n-i-1 are greater than a. When we build the tree, a will appear at the root, the i
         smaller elements will be descendants of the left child of the root, and the remaining n-
         i-1 will be descendants of the right child. This tree is sketched in Fig. 5.7.

              As all orders for the i small elements and for the n-i-1 large elements are equally



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (6 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         likely, we expect that the left and right subtrees of the root will




                                                  Fig. 5.7. Binary search tree.

         have average path lengths P(i) and P(n-i-1), respectively. Since these elements are
         reached through the root of the complete tree, we must add 1 to the number of nodes
         on every path. Thus P(n) can be calculated by averaging, for all i between 0 and n-1,
         the sum




         The first term is the average path length in the left subtree, weighted by its size. The
         second term is the analogous quantity for the right subtree, and the 1/n term
         represents the contribution of the root. By averaging the above sum for all i between
         1 and n, we obtain the recurrence




              The first part of the summation (5.1),                             , can be made identical to the


         second part                                            if we substitute i for n-i-1 in the second part.

         Also, the term for i=0 in the summation                                 is zero, so we can begin the
         summation at 1. Thus (5.1) can be written




         We shall show by induction on n, starting at n=1, that P(n) ≤ 1 + 4logn. Surely this
         statement is true for n = 1, since P(1) = 1. Suppose it is true for all i < n. Then by
         (5.2)


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (7 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         The last step is justified, since             , and therefore, the last term of the
         second line is at most 1. We shall divide the terms in the summation of (5.3) into two
         parts, those for i ≤ [n/2]-1, which do not exceed ilog(n/2), and those for i> [n/2]-1,
         which do not exceed ilogn. Thus (5.3) can be rewritten




         Whether n is even or odd, one can show that the first sum of (5.4) does not exceed
         (n2/8)log(n/2), which is (n2/8)logn - (n2/8), and the second sum does not exceed
         (3n2/8)logn. Thus, we can rewrite (5.4) as




         as we wished to prove. This step completes the induction and shows that the average
         time to follow a path from the root to a random node of a binary search tree
         constructed by random insertions is O(logn), that is to within a constant factor as
         good as if the tree were complete. A more careful analysis shows that the constant 4
         above is really about 1.4.

              We can conclude from the above that the time of membership testing for a random



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (8 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         member of the set takes O(logn) time. A similar analysis shows that if we include in
         our average path length only those nodes that are missing both children, or only those
         missing left children, then the average path length still obeys an equation similar to
         (5.1), and is therefore O(logn). We may then conclude that testing membership of a
         random element not in the set, inserting a random new element, and deleting a
         random element also all take O(logn) time on the average.


         Evaluation of Binary Search Tree
         Performance
         Hash table implementations of dictionaries require constant time per operation on the
         average. Although this performance is better than that for a binary search tree, a hash
         table requires O(n) steps for the MIN operation, so if MIN is used frequently, the
         binary search tree will be the better choice; if MIN is not needed, we would probably
         prefer the hash table.

            The binary search tree should also be compared with the partially ordered tree
         used for priority queues in Chapter 4. A partially ordered tree with n elements
         requires only O(logn) steps for each INSERT and DELETEMIN operation not only
         on the average, but also in the worst case. Moreover, the actual constant of
         proportionality in front of the logn factor will be smaller for a partially ordered tree
         than for a binary search tree. However, the binary search tree permits general
         DELETE and MIN operations, as well as the combination DELETEMIN, while the
         partially ordered tree permits only the latter. Moreover, MEMBER requires O(n)
         steps on a partially ordered tree but only O(logn) steps on a binary search tree. Thus,
         while the partially ordered tree is well suited to implementing priority queues, it
         cannot do as efficiently any of the additional operations that the binary search tree
         can do.


         5.3 Tries
         In this section we shall present a special structure for representing sets of character
         strings. The same method works for representing data types that are strings of objects
         of any type, such as strings of integers. This structure is known as the trie, derived
         from the middle letters of the word "retrieval." † By way of introduction, consider the
         following use of a set of character strings.

         Example 5.2. As indicated in Chapter 1, one way to implement a spelling checker is
         to read a text file, break it into words (character strings separated by blanks and new
         lines), and find those words not in a standard dictionary of words in common use.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (9 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         Words in the text but not in the dictionary are printed out as possible misspellings. In
         Fig. 5.8 we see a sketch of one possible program spell. It makes use of a procedure
         getword(x, f) that sets x to be the next word in text file f; variable x is of a type called
         wordtype, which we shall define later. The variable A is of type SET; the SET
         operations we shall need are INSERT, DELETE, MAKENULL, and PRINT. The
         PRINT operator prints the members of the set.

             The trie structure supports these set operations when the elements of the set are
         words, i.e., character strings. It is appropriate when many words begin with the same
         sequences of letters, that is, when the number of distinct prefixes among all the words
         in the set is much less than the total length of all the words.

             In a trie, each path from the root to a leaf corresponds to one word in the
         represented set. This way, the nodes of the trie correspond to the prefixes of words in
         the set. To avoid confusion between words like THE and THEN, let us add a special
         endmarker symbol, $, to the ends of all words, so no prefix of a word can be a word
         itself.

         Example 5.3. In Fig. 5.9 we see a trie representing the set of words {THE, THEN,
         THIN, THIS, TIN, SIN, SING}. That is, the root corresponds to the empty string, and
         its two children correspond to the prefixes T and S. The


                program spell ( input, output, dictionary );
                  type
                    wordtype = { to be defined };
                    SET = { to be defined, using the trie structure };
                var
                    A: SET; { holds input words not yet found in the dictionary }
                    nextword: wordtype;
                    dictionary: file of char;

              procedure getword ( var x: wordtype; f: file
         of char );
                 { a procedure to be defined that sets x
                    to be the next word in file f}

                procedure INSERT ( x: wordtype; var S: SET );
                  { to be defined }

                procedure DELETE (x: wordtype; var S: SET );
                  { to be defined }




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (10 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                procedure MAKENULL ( var S: SET );
                  { to be defined }

                procedure PRINT ( var S: SET );
                  { to be defined }

                begin
                  MAKENULL(A);
                  while not eof(input) do begin
                    getword ( nextword, input);
                    INSERT(nextword, A)
                  end;
                  while not eof (dictionary) do begin
                    getword ( nextword, dictionary);
                    DELETE(nextword, A)
                  end;
                  PRINT(A)
                end; { spell }

                                            Fig. 5.8. Sketch of spelling checker.

         leftmost leaf represents the word THE, the next leaf the word THEN, and so on.

              We can make the following observations about the trie in Fig. 5.9.

               1. Each node has at most 27 children, one for each letter and $.




                                                               Fig. 5.9 A Trie.

               2. Most nodes will have many fewer than 27 children.
               3. A leaf reached by an edge labeled $ cannot have any children, and may as well
                  not be there.


         Trie Nodes as ADT's
         We can view a node of a trie as a mapping whose domain is {A, B, ... , Z, $} (or



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (11 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         whatever alphabet we choose) and whose value set is the type "pointer to trie node."
         Moreover, the trie itself can be identified with its root, so the ADT's TRIE and
         TRIENODE have the same data type, although their operations are substantially
         different. On TRIENODE we need the following operations:

               1. procedure ASSIGN(node, c, p) that assigns value p (a pointer to a node) to
                  character c in node node,
               2. function VALUEOF(node, c) that produces the value associated with
                  character c in node,† and
               3. procedure GETNEW(node, c) to make the value of node for character c be a
                  pointer to a new node.

         Technically, we also need a procedure MAKENULL(node) to make node be the null
         mapping. One simple implementation of trie nodes is an array node of pointers to
         nodes, with the index set being {A, B, ..., Z, $}. That is, we define


             type
                chars = ('A', 'B', ... , 'Z', '$');
                TRIENODE = array[chars] of ↑;
         TRIENODE;



         If node is a trie node, node[c] is VALUEOF(node, c) for any c in the set chars. To
         avoid creating many leaves that are children corresponding to '$', we shall adopt the
         convention that node['$'] is either nil or a pointer to the node itself. In the former
         case, node has no child corresponding to '$', and in the latter case it is deemed to have
         such a child, although we never create it. Then we can write the procedures for trie
         nodes as in Fig. 5.10.


                procedure MAKENULL ( var node: TRIENODE );
                  { makes node a leaf, i.e., a null mapping }
                  var
                    c: chars;
                  begin
                    for c: = 'A' to '$' do
                        node [c] := nil
                  end; { MAKENULL }

                procedure ASSIGN ( var node: TRIENODE; c: chars;
         p: ↑ TRIENODE );



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (12 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                       begin
                         node [c] := p
                       end; { ASSIGN }

               function VALUEOF ( var node: TRIENODE; c: chars ):
         ↑ TRIENODE;
                 begin
                   return (node [c])
                 end; { VALUEOF }

                    procedure GETNEW ( var node: TRIENODE; c: chars );
                      begin
                        new (node [c]);
                        MAKENULL(node [c])
                      end; { GETNEW }

                                              Fig. 5.10 Operation in trie nodes.

         Now let us define


                type
                  TRIE = ↑ TRIENODE;

         We shall assume wordtype is an array of characters of some fixed length. The value
         of such an array will always be assumed to have at least one '$'; we take the end of
         the represented word to be the first '$', no matter what follows (presumably more '$'
         's). On this assumption, we can write the procedure INSERT(x, words) to insert x into
         set words represented by a trie, as shown in Fig. 5.11. We leave the writing of
         MAKENULL, DELETE, and PRINT for tries represented as arrays for exercises.


               procedure INSERT ( x: wordtype; var words: TRIE );
                 var
                    i: integer; { counts positions in word x }
                    t: TRIE; { used to point to trie nodes
                        corresponding to prefixes of x }
                 begin
                    i : = 1;
                    t := words;
                    while x[i] <> '$' do begin
                        if VALUEOF(t↑,
         x[i]) = nil then



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (13 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                              { if current node has no child for character x[i],
                                  create one }
                              GETNEW(t↑, x[i]);
                           t := VALUEOF(t↑,
         x[i]);
                             { proceed to the child of t for character x[i],
                                whether or not that child was just created }
                         i := i+1 { move along the word x }
                      end;
                      { now we have reached the first '$' in x }
                      ASSIGN(t↑, '$', t)
                         { make loop for '$' to represent a leaf }
                    end; {INSERT}

                                              Fig. 5.11 The procedure INSERT.


         A List Representation for Trie Nodes
         The array representation of trie nodes takes a collection of words, having among them
         p different prefixes, and represents them with 27p bytes of storage. That amount of
         space could far exceed the total length of the words in the set. However, there is
         another implementation of tries that may save space. Recall that each trie node is a
         mapping, as discussed in Section 2.6. In principle, any implementation of mappings
         would do. Yet in practice, we want a representation suitable for mappings with a
         small domain and for mappings defined for comparatively few members of that
         domain. The linked list representation for mappings satisfies these requirements
         nicely. We may represent the mapping that is a trie node by a linked list of the
         characters for which the associated value is not the nil pointer. That is, a trie node is a
         linked list of cells of the type


                  type
                    celltype = record
                       domain: chars;
                       value: ↑ celltype;
                          { pointer to first cell on list for the child node }
                       next: ↑ celltype
                          { pointer to next cell on the list }
                    end;




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (14 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




             We shall leave the procedures ASSIGN, VALUEOF, MAKENULL, and
         GETNEW for this implementation of trie nodes as exercises. After writing these
         procedures, the INSERT operations on tries, in Fig. 5.11, and the other operations on
         tries that we left as exercises, should work correctly.


         Evaluation of the Trie Data Structure
         Let us compare the time and space needed to represent n words with a total of p
         different prefixes and a total length of l using a hash table and a trie. In what follows,
         we shall assume that pointers require four bytes. Perhaps the most space-efficient
         way to store words and still support INSERT and DELETE efficiently is in a hash
         table. If the words are of varying length, the cells of the buckets should not contain
         the words themselves; rather, the cells consist of two pointers, one to link the cells of
         the bucket and the other pointing to the beginning of a word belonging in the bucket.

           The words themselves are stored in a large character array, and the end of each
         word is indicated by an endmarker character such as '$'. For example, the words THE,
         THEN, and THIN could be stored as

                                                    THE$THEN$THIN$ . . .

         The pointers for the three words are cursors to positions 1, 5, and 10 of the array. The
         amount of space used in the buckets and character array is

               1. 8n bytes for the cells of the buckets, there being one cell for each of the n
                  words, and a cell has two pointers or 8 bytes,
               2. l + n bytes for the character array to store the n words of total length l and
                  their endmarkers.

         The total space is thus 9n + l bytes plus whatever amount is used for the bucket
         headers.

            In comparison, a trie with nodes implemented by linked lists requires p + n cells,
         one cell for each prefix and one cell for the end of each word. Each trie cell has a
         character and two pointers, and needs nine bytes, for a total space of 9n + 9p. If l plus
         the space for the bucket headers exceeds 9p, the trie uses less space. However, for
         applications such as storing a dictionary where l/p is typically less than 3, the hash
         table would use less space.

            In favor of the trie, however, let us note that we can travel down a trie, and thus
         perform operations INSERT, DELETE, and MEMBER in time proportional to the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (15 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         length of the word involved. A hash function to be truly "random" should involve
         each character of the word being hashed. It is fair, therefore, to state that computing
         the hash function takes roughly as much time as performing an operation like
         MEMBER on the trie. Of course the time spent computing the hash function does not
         include the time spent resolving collisions or performing the insertion, deletion, or
         membership test on the hash table, so we can expect tries to be considerably faster
         than hash tables for dictionaries whose elements are character strings.

            Another advantage to the trie is that it supports the MIN operation efficiently,
         while hash tables do not. Further, in the hash table organization described above, we
         cannot easily reuse the space in the character array when a word is deleted (but see
         Chapter 12 for methods of handling such a problem).


         5.4 Balanced Tree Implementations of
         Sets
         In Sections 5.1 and 5.2 we saw how sets could be implemented by binary search
         trees, and we saw that operations like INSERT could be performed in time
         proportional to the average depth of nodes in that tree. Further, we discovered that
         this average depth is O(logn) for a "random" tree of n nodes. However, some
         sequences of insertions and deletions can produce binary search trees whose average
         depth is proportional to n. This suggests that we might try to rearrange the tree after
         each insertion and deletion so that it is always complete; then the time for INSERT
         and similar operations would always be O(logn).

             In Fig. 5.12(a) we see a tree of six nodes that becomes the complete tree of seven
         nodes in Fig. 5.12(b), when element 1 is inserted. Every element in Fig. 5.12(a),
         however, has a different parent in Fig. 5.12(b), so we must take n steps to insert 1 into
         a tree like Fig. 5.12(a), if we wish to keep the tree as balanced as possible. It is thus
         unlikely that simply insisting that the binary search tree be complete will lead to an
         implementation of a dictionary, priority queue, or other ADT that includes INSERT
         among its operations, in O(logn) time.

            There are several other approaches that do yield worst case O(logn) time per
         operation for dictionaries and priority queues, and we shall consider one of them,
         called a "2-3 tree," in detail. A 2-3 tree is a tree with the following two properties.

               1. Each interior node has two or three children.
               2. Each path from the root to a leaf has the same length.

         We shall also consider a tree with zero nodes or one node as special cases of a 2-3



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (16 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         tree.

            We represent sets of elements that are ordered by some linear order <, as follows.
         Elements are placed at the leaves; if element a is to the left of




                                                   Fig. 5.12. Complete trees.

         element b, then a < b must hold. We shall assume that the "<" ordering of elements is
         based on one field of a record that forms the element type; this field is called the key.
         For example, elements might represent people and certain information about people,
         and in that case, the key field might be "social security number."

             At each interior node we record the key of the smallest element that is a
         descendant of the second child and, if there is a third child, we record the key of the
         smallest element descending from that child as well.† Figure 5.13 is an example of a
         2-3 tree. In that and subsequent examples, we shall identify an element with its key
         field, so the order of elements becomes obvious.




                                                       Fig. 5.13 A 2-3 tree.

            Observe that a 2-3 tree of k levels has between 2k-1 and 3k-1 leaves. Put another
         way, a 2-3 tree representing a set of n elements requires at least 1 + log3n levels and
         no more than 1 + log2n levels. Thus, path lengths in the tree are O(logn).

             We can test membership of a record with key x in a set represented by a 2-3 tree in
         O(logn) time by simply moving down the tree, using the values of the elements
         recorded at the interior nodes to guide our path. At a node node, compare x with the
         value y that represents the smallest element descending from the second child of
         node. (Recall we are treating elements as if they consisted solely of a key field.) If x <
         y, move to the first child of node. If x≥y, and node has only two children, move to the
         second child of node. If node has three children and x≥y, compare x with z, the
         second value recorded at node, the value that indicates the smallest descendant of the
         third child of node. If x<z, go to the second child, and if x≥z, go to the third child. In



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (17 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         this manner, we find ourselves at a leaf eventually, and x is in the represented set if
         and only if x is at the leaf. Evidently, if during this process we find x=y or x=z, we
         can stop immediately. However, we stated the algorithm as we did because in some
         cases we shall wish to find the leaf with x as well as to verify its existence.


         Insertion into a 2-3 Tree
         To insert a new element x into a 2-3 tree, we proceed at first as if we were testing
         membership of x in the set. However, at the level just above the leaves, we shall be at
         a node node whose children, we discover, do not include x. If node has only two
         children, we simply make x the third child of node, placing the children in the proper
         order. We then adjust the two numbers at node to reflect the new situation.

            For example, if we insert 18 into Fig. 5.13, we wind up with node equal to the
         rightmost node at the middle level. We place 18 among the children of node, whose
         proper order is 16, 18, 19. The two values recorded at node become 18 and 19, the
         elements at the second and third children. The result is shown in Fig. 5.14.

             Suppose, however, that x is the fourth, rather than the third child of node. We
         cannot have a node with four children in a 2-3 tree, so we split node into two nodes,
         which we call node and node'. The two smallest elements among the four children of
         node stay with node, while the two larger elements become children of node'. Now,
         we must insert node' among the children of p, the parent of node. This part of the
         insertion is analogous to the insertion of a leaf as a child of node. That is, if p had two
         children, we make node' the third and place it immediately to the right of node. If p
         had three children before node' was created, we split p into p and p', giving p the two
         leftmost children and p' the remaining two, and then we insert p' among the children
         of p's parent, recursively.

            One special case occurs when we wind up splitting the root. In that case we create
         a new root, whose two children are the two nodes into which the




                                             Fig. 5.14 2-3 tree with 18 inserted.

         old root was split. This is how the number of levels in a 2-3 tree increases.

         Example 5.4. Suppose we insert 10 into the tree of Fig. 5.14. The intended parent of



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (18 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         10 already has children 7, 8, and 12, so we split it into two nodes. The first of these
         has children 7 and 8; the second has 10 and 12. The result is shown in Fig. 5.15(a).
         We must now insert the new node with children 10 and 12 in its proper place as a
         child of the root of Fig. 5.15(a). Doing so gives the root four children, so we split it,
         and create a new root, as shown in Fig. 5.15(b). The details of how information
         regarding smallest elements of subtrees is carried up the tree will be given when we
         develop the program for the command INSERT.


         Deletion in a 2-3 tree
         When we delete a leaf, we may leave its parent node with only one child. If node is
         the root, delete node and let its lone child be the new root. Otherwise, let p be the
         parent of node. If p has another child, adjacent to node on either the right or the left,
         and that child of p has three children, we can transfer the proper one of those three to
         node. Then node has two children, and we are done.

            If the children of p adjacent to node have only two children, transfer the lone child
         of node to an adjacent sibling of node, and delete node. Should p now have only one
         child, repeat all the above, recursively, with p in place of node.

         Example 5.5. Let us begin with the tree of Fig. 5.15(b). If 10 is deleted, its parent has
         only one child. But the grandparent has another child that has three children, 16, 18,
         and 19. This node is to the right of the deficient node, so we pass the deficient node
         the smallest element, 16, leaving the 2-3 tree in Fig. 5.16(a).




                                   Fig. 5.15 Insertion of 10 into the tree of Fig.5.14.

             Next suppose we delete 7 from the tree of Fig. 5.16(a). Its parent now has only one
         child, 8, and the grandparent has no child with three children. We therefore make 8 be
         a sibling of 2 and 5, leaving the tree of Fig. 5.16(b). Now the node starred in Fig.
         5.16(b) has only one child, and its parent has no other child with three children. Thus
         we delete the starred node, making its child be a child of the sibling of the starred
         node. Now the root has only one child, and we delete it, leaving the tree of Fig.
         5.16(c).

            Observe in the above examples, the frequent manipulation of the values at interior
         nodes. While we can always calculate these values by walking the tree, it can be done



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (19 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         as we manipulate the tree itself, provided we remember the smallest value among the
         descendants of each node along the path from the root to the deleted leaf. This
         information can be computed by a recursive deletion algorithm, with the call at each
         node being passed, from above, the correct quantity (or the value "minus infinity" if
         we are along the leftmost path). The details require careful case analysis and will be
         sketched later when we consider the program for the DELETE operation.


         Data Types for 2-3 Trees
         Let us restrict ourselves to representing by 2-3 trees sets of elements whose keys are
         real numbers. The nature of other fields that go with the field key, to make up a
         record of type elementtype, we shall leave unspecified, as it has no bearing on what
         follows.




                                               Fig. 5.16 Deletion in a 2-3 tree.

             In Pascal, the parents of leaves must be records of consisting of two reals (the key
         of the smallest elements in the second and third subtrees) and of three pointers to
         elements. The parents of these nodes are records consisting of two reals and of three
         pointers to parents of leaves. This progression continues indefinitely; each level in a 2-
         3 tree is of a different type from all other levels. Such a situation would make
         programming 2-3 tree operations in Pascal impossible, but fortunately, Pascal
         provides a mechanism, the variant record structure, that enables us to regard all 2-3
         tree nodes as having the same type, even though some are elements, and some are
         records with pointers and reals.† We can define nodes as in Fig. 5.17. Then we
         declare a set, represented by a 2-3 tree, to be a pointer to the root as in Fig. 5.17.


         Implementation of INSERT
         The details of operations on 2-3 trees are quite involved, although the principles are
         simple. We shall therefore describe only one operation, insertion, in detail; the others,
         deletion and membership testing, are similar in spirit, and finding the minimum is a
         trivial search down the leftmost path. We shall write the insertion routine as main
         procedure, INSERT, which we call at the root, and a procedure insert 1, which gets
         called recursively down the tree.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (20 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                type
                  elementtype = record
                     key: real;
                     {other fields as warranted}
                  end;
                  nodetypes = (leaf, interior);
                  twothreenode = record
                     case kind: nodetypes of
                        leaf: (element: elementtype);
                        interior: (firstchild, secondchild, thirdchild: ↑ twothreenode;
                            lowofsecond, lowofthird: real)
                  end;
                  SET = ↑ twothreenode;

                                       Fig. 5.17. Definition of a node in a 2-3 tree.

         For convenience, we assume that a 2-3 tree is not a single node or empty. These two
         cases require a straightforward sequence of steps which the reader is invited to
         provide as an exercise.


         procedure insert1 ( node: ↑ twothreenode;
            x: elementtype; { x is to be inserted into the subtree of node }
            var pnew: ↑ twothreenode; { pointer to new node
         created to right of node }
            var low: real ); { smallest element in the subtree pointed to by pnew}

             begin
               pnew := nil;
               if node is a leaf then begin
                   if x is not the element at node then begin
                       create new node pointed to by pnew;
                       put x at the new node;
                       low := x.key
                   end
               end
               else begin { node is an interior node }
                   let w be the child of node to whose subtree x belongs;
                   insert1(w, x, pback, lowback);
                   if pback < > nil then begin
                      insert pointer pback among the children of node just
                         to the right of w;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (21 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                    if node has four children then begin
                       create new node pointed to by pnew;
                       give the new node the third and fourth children of node;
                       adjust lowofsecond and lowofthird in node and the new node;
                             set low to be the lowest key among the
                                 children of the new node
                    end
                 end
              end
         end; { insert 1 }

                                    Fig. 5.18. Sketch of 2-3 tree insertion program.

            We would like insert 1 to return both a pointer to a new node, if it must create one,
         and the key of the smallest element descended from that new node. As the
         mechanism in Pascal for creating such a function is awkward, we shall instead
         declare insert 1 to be a procedure that assigns values to parameters pnew and low in
         the case that it must "return" a new node. We sketch insert 1 in Fig. 5.18. The
         complete procedure is shown in Fig. 5.19; some comments in Fig. 5.18 have been
         omitted from Fig. 5.19 to save space.


         procedure insert 1 ( node: ↑ twothreenode;
         x: elementtype;
            var pnew: ↑ twothreenode; var
         low: real );
            var
               pback: ↑ twothreenode;
               lowback : real;
               child: 1..3; { indicates which child of node is followed
                 in recursive call (cf. w in Fig. 5.18) }
               w: ↑ twothreenode; { pointer to the child }

            begin
              pnew := nil;
              if node ↑.kind = leaf
         then begin
                  if node ↑.element.key < >
         x .key then begin
                      { create new leaf holding x and "return" this node }
                      new (pnew, leaf);
                      if (node ↑.element.key < x.key ) then
                          { place x in new node to right of current node }


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (22 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                           begin pnew ↑.element
         := x; low := x .key end
                       else begin { x belongs to left of element at current node }
                           pnew ↑.element := node
         ↑.element;
                           node ↑.element : = x;
                           low: =pnew ↑.element.key
                       end
                   end
               end
               else begin { node is an interior node }
                   { select the child of node that we must follow }
                   if x.key < node ↑.lowofsecond then
                       begin child := 1; w := node ↑.firstchild end
               else if (node ↑.thirdchild
         = nil) or (x.key < node ↑.lowofthird) then begin
                   { x is in second subtree }
                   child := 2;
                   w := node ↑.secondchild
               end
               else begin { x is in third subtree }
                   child := 3;
                   w := node ↑.thirdchild
               end;
               insert 1 ( w , x, pback, lowback ) ;
               if pback < > nil then
                   { a new child of node must be inserted }
                   if node ↑.thirdchild =
         nil then
                      { node had only two children, so insert new node in proper place }
                      if child = 2 then begin
                          node ↑.thirdchild :=
         pback ;
                          node ↑.lowofthird :=
         lowback
                      end
                      else begin { child = 1 }
                          node ↑.thirdchild :=
         node ↑.secondchild ;
                          node ↑.lowofthird : =
         node ↑.lowofsecond ;
                          node ↑.secondchild :=


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (23 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         pback ;
                             node ↑.lowofsecond :=
         lowback
                     end
                  else begin { node already had three children }
                     new (pnew , interior );
                     if child = 3 then begin
                         { pback and third child become children of new node }
                         pnew ↑.firstchild :=
         node ↑.thirdchild ;
                         pnew ↑.secondchild : =
         pback ;
                         pnew ↑.thirdchild :=
         nil;
                         pnew ↑.lowofsecond :=
         lowback;
                           { lowofthird is undefined for pnew}
                         low := node ↑.lowofthird ;
                         node ↑.thirdchild := nil
                     end
                     else begin { child ↑ 2; move third
         child of node to pnew}
                         pnew ↑.secondchild :=
         node ↑.thirdchild ;
                         pnew ↑.lowofsecond :=
         node ↑.lowofthird ;
                         pnew ↑.thirdchild : =
         nil;
                         node ↑.thirdchild := nil
                     end;
                     if child = 2 then begin
                         { pback becomes first child of pnew}
                         pnew ↑.firstchild :=
         pback ;
                         low := lowback
                     end;
                     if child = 1 then begin
                         { second child of node is moved to pnew;
                            pback becomes second child of node }
                         pnew ↑.firstchild :=
         node ↑.secondchild ;
                         low := node ↑.lowofsecond ;


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (24 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                             node ↑.secondchild : =
         pback ;
                             node ↑.lowofsecond :=
         lowback
                      end
                    end
           end
         end; { insert 1 }

                                              Fig. 5.19. The procedure insert 1.

            Now we can write the procedure INSERT, which calls insert 1. If insert 1
         "returns" a new node, then INSERT must create a new root. The code is shown in
         Fig. 5.20 on the assumption that the type SET is ↑ twothreenode, i.e., a pointer to the
         root of a 2-3 tree whose leaves contain the members of the set.


         procedure INSERT ( x: elementtype; var S: SET );
            var
              pback: ↑ twothreenode; { pointer to new node
         returned by insert 1 }
              lowback: real; { low value in subtree of pback }
              saveS: SET; { place to store a temporary copy of the pointer S }
            begin
              { checks for S being empty or a single node should occur here,
                 and an appropriate insertion procedure should be included }
              insert 1(S, x, pback , lowback ) ;
              if pback < > nil then begin
                { create new root; its children are now pointed to by S and pback }
                  saveS := S;
                  new(S);
                  S ↑.firstchild := saveS;
                  S ↑.secondchild := pback;
                  S ↑.lowofsecond := lowback;
                  S ↑.thirdchild := nil;
              end
         end; { INSERT }

                                 Fig. 5.20. INSERT for sets represented by 2-3 trees.


         Implementation of DELETE

http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (25 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         We shall sketch a function delete 1 that takes a pointer to a node node and an element
         x, and deletes a leaf descended from node having value x, if there is one.† Function
         delete 1 returns true if after deletion node has only one child, and it returns false if
         node still has two or three children. A sketch of the code for delete 1 is shown in Fig.
         5.21.

            We leave the detailed code for function delete 1 for the reader. Another exercise is
         to write a procedure DELETE(S, x) that checks for the special cases that the set S
         consists only of a single leaf or is empty, and otherwise calls delete 1(S, x); if delete 1
         returns true, the procedure removes the root (the node pointed to by S) and makes S
         point to its lone child.


         function delete 1 ( node : ↑ twothreenode;
         x: elementtype ) : boolean;
             var
                onlyone: boolean; { to hold the value returned by a call to delete 1 }
             begin
                delete 1 := false;
                if the children of node are leaves then begin
                if x is among those leaves then begin
                    remove x;
                    shift children of node to the right of x one position left;
                    if node now has one child then
                      delete 1 := true
                 end
               end
               else begin { node is at level two or higher }
                    determine which child of node could have x as a descendant;
                    onlyone := delete 1(w, x); ( w stands for node
         ↑.firstchild,
                       node ↑.secondchild, or node
         ↑.thirdchild, as appropriate }
                    if onlyone then begin ( fix children of node )
                       if w is the first child of node then
                         if y, the second child of node, has three children then
                            make the first child of y be the second child of w
                         else begin { y has two children }
                            make the child of w be the first child of y;
                            remove w from among the children of node;
                            if node now has one child then
                                delete 1 := true



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (26 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                     end;
                   if w is the second child of node then
                     if y, the first child of node, has three children then
                        make the third child of y be the first child of w
                     else { y has two children }
                        if z, the third child of node, exists
                           and has three children then
                              make first child of z be the second child of w
                        else begin { no other child of node has three children }
                           make the child of w be the third child of y;
                           remove w from among the children of node;
                           if node now has one child then
                              delete 1 := true
                        end;
                     if w is the third child of node then
                       if y, the second child of node, has three children then
                          make the third child of y be the first child of w
                       else begin { y has two children }
                          make the child of w be the third child of y;
                          remove w from among the children of node
                       end { note node surely has two children left in this case }
                 end
               end
         end; { delete 1 }

                                         Fig. 5.21. Recursive deletion procedure.


         5.5 Sets with the MERGE and FIND
         Operations
         In certain problems we start with a collection of objects, each in a set by itself; we
         then combine sets in some order, and from time to time ask which set a particular
         object is in. These problems can be solved using the operations MERGE and FIND.
         The operation MERGE(A, B, C) makes C equal to the union of sets A and B, provided
         A and B are disjoint (have no member in common); MERGE is undefined if A and B
         are not disjoint. FIND(x) is a function that returns the set of which x is a member; in
         case x is in two or more sets, or in no set, FIND is not defined.

         Example 5.6. An equivalence relation is a reflexive, symmetric, and transitive
         relation. That is, if ≡ is an equivalence relation on set S, then for any (not necessarily
         distinct) members a, b, and c in S, the following properties hold:



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (27 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




               1. a ≡ a (reflexivity)
               2. If a ≡ b, then b ≡ a (symmetry).
               3. If a ≡ b and b ≡ c, then a ≡ c (transitivity).

             The relation "is equal to" (=) is the paradigm equivalence relation on any set S.
         For a, b, and c in S, we have (1) a = a, (2) if a = b, then b = a, and (3) if a = b and b =
         c, then a = c. There are many other equivalence relations, however, and we shall
         shortly see several additional examples.

            In general, whenever we partition a collection of objects into disjoint groups, the
         relation a ≡ b if and only if a and b are in the same group is an equivalence relation.
         "Is equal to" is the special case where every element is in a group by itself.

            More formally, if a set S has an equivalence relation defined on it, then the set S
         can be partitioned into disjoint subsets S1, S2, ..., called equivalence classes, whose
         union is S. Each subset Si consists of equivalent members of S. That is, a ≡ b for all a
         and b in Si, and a ?? b if a and b are in different subsets. For example, the relation
         congruence modulo n† is an equivalence relation on the set of integers. To check that
         this is so, note that a-a = 0, which is a multiple of n (reflexivity); if a-b = dn, then b-a
         = (-d)n (symmetry); and if a-b = dn and b-c = en, then a-c = (d+e)n (transitivity). In
         the case of congruence modulo n there are n equivalence classes, which are the set of
         integers congruent to 0, the set of integers congruent to 1, ... , the set of integers
         congruent to n - 1.

            The equivalence problem can be formulated in the following manner. We are
         given a set S and a sequence of statements of the form "a is equivalent to b." We are
         to process the statements in order in such a way that at any time we are able to
         determine in which equivalence class a given element belongs. For example, suppose
         S = {1, 2, ... , 7} and we are given the sequence of statements

                                                         1≡2 5≡6 3≡4 1≡4

         to process. The following sequence of equivalence classes needs to be constructed,
         assuming that initially each element of S is in an equivalence class by itself.

                   1≡2 {1,2} {3} {4} {5} {6} {7}

                   5≡6 {1,2} {3} {4} {5,6} {7}

                   3≡4 {1,2} {3,4} {5,6} {7}



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (28 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                   1≡4 {1,2,3,4} {5,6} {7}

             We can "solve" the equivalence problem by starting with each element in a named
         set. When we process statement a≡b, we FIND the equivalence classes of a and b and
         then MERGE them. We can at any time use FIND to tell us the current equivalence
         class of any element.

            The equivalence problem arises in several areas of computer science. For example,
         one form occurs when a Fortran compiler has to process "equivalence declarations"
         such as

                              EQUIVALENCE (A(1),B(1,2),C(3)), (A(2),D,E), (F,G)

            Another example, presented in Chapter 7, uses solutions to the equivalence
         problem to help find minimum-cost spanning trees.


         A Simple Implementation of MFSET
         Let us begin with a simplified version of the MERGE-FIND ADT. We shall define an
         ADT, called MFSET, consisting of a set of subsets, which we shall call components,
         together with the following operations:

               1. MERGE(A, B) takes the union of the components A and B and calls the result
                  either A or B, arbitrarily.
               2. FIND(x) is a function that returns the name of the component of which x is a
                  member.
               3. INITIAL(A, x) creates a component named A that contains only the element x.

             To make a reasonable implementation of MFSET, we must restrict our underlying
         types, or alternatively, we should recognize that MFSET really has two other types as
         "parameters" - the type of set names and the type of members of these sets. In many
         applications we can use integers as set names. If we take n to be the number of
         elements, we may also use integers in the range [1..n] for the members of
         components. For the implementation we have in mind, it is important that the type of
         set members be a subrange type, because we want to index into an array defined over
         that subrange. The type of set names is not important, as this type is the type of array
         elements, not their indices. Observe, however, that if we wanted the member type to
         be other than a subrange type, we could create a mapping, with a hash table, for
         example, that assigned these to unique integers in a subrange. We only need to know
         the total number of elements in advance.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (29 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




              The implementation we have in mind is to declare


                const
                  n = { number of elements };
                type
                  MFSET = array[1..n] of integer;



         as a special case of the more general type


                    array[subrange of members] of (type of set names);



         Suppose we declare components to be of type MFSET with the intention that
         components[x] holds the name of the set currently containing x. Then the three
         MFSET operations are easy to write. For example, the operation MERGE is shown in
         Fig. 5.22. INITIAL(A, x) simply sets components[x] to A, and FIND(x) returns
         components [x].

              The time performance of this implementation of MFSET is easy to


                procedure MERGE ( A, B: integer; var C: MFSET );
                   var
                    x: 1..n;
                   begin
                    for x:= 1 to n do
                        if C[x] = B then
                           C[x] := A
                   end; { MERGE }

                                             Fig. 5.22. The procedure MERGE.

         analyze. Each execution of the procedure MERGE takes O(n) time. On the other
         hand, the obvious implementations of INITIAL(A, x) and FIND(x) have constant
         running times.


         A Faster Implementation of MFSET

http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (30 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         Using the algorithm in Fig. 5.22, a sequence of n-1 MERGE instructions will take
         O(n2) time.† One way to speed up the MERGE operation is to link together all
         members of a component in a list. Then, instead of scanning all members when we
         merge component B into A, we need only run down the list of members of B. This
         arrangement saves time on the average. However, it could happen that the ith merge is
         of the form MERGE(A, B) where A is a component of size 1 and B is a component of
         size i, and that the result is named A. This merge operation would require O(i) steps,
         and a sequence of n-1 such merge instructions would take on the order of

                                   time.

            One way to avoid this worst case situation is to keep track of the size of each
         component and always merge the smaller into the larger.‡ Thus, every time a member
         is merged into a bigger component, it finds itself in a component at least twice as big.
         Thus, if there are initially n components, each with one member, none of the n
         members can have its component changed more than 1+log n times. As the time spent
         by this new version of MERGE is proportional to the number of members whose
         component names are changed, and the total number of such changes is at most
         n(1+log n), we see that O(n log n) work suffices for all merges.

            Now let us consider the data structure needed for this implementation. First, we
         need a mapping from set names to records consisting of

               1. a count giving the number of members in the set and
               2. the index in the array of the first element of that set.

         We also need another array of records, indexed by members, to indicate

               1. the set of which each element is a member and
               2. the next array element on the list for that set.

         We use 0 to serve as NIL, the end-of-list marker. In a language that lent itself to such
         constructs, we would prefer to use pointers in this array, but Pascal does not permit
         pointers into arrays.

            In the special case where set names, as well as members, are chosen from the
         subrange 1..n, we can use an array for the mapping described above. That is, we
         define




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (31 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                type
                     nametype: 1..n;
                     elementtype = 1..n;
                     MFSET = record
                       setheaders: array[ 1..n] of record
                          { headers for set lists }
                          count: 0..n;
                          firstelement: 0..n
                       end;
                       names; array[1..n] of record
                          { table giving set containing each member }
                          setname: nametype;
                          nextelement: 0..n
                   end
                end;

         The procedures INITIAL, MERGE, and FIND are shown in Fig. 5.23.

             Figure 5.24 shows an example of the data structure used in Fig. 5.23, where set 1
         is {1, 3, 4}, set 2 is {2}, and set 5 is {5, 6}.


         A Tree Implementation of MFSET's
         Another, completely different, approach to the implementation of MFSET's uses trees
         with pointers to parents. We shall describe this approach informally. The basic idea is
         that nodes of trees correspond to set members, with an array or other implementation
         of a mapping leading from set members to their nodes. Each node, except the root of
         each tree, has a pointer to its parent. The roots hold the name of the set, as well as an
         element. A mapping from set names to roots allows access to any given set, when
         merges are done.

            Figure 5.25 shows the sets A = {1, 2, 3, 4}, B = {5, 6}, and C = {7} represented in
         this form. The rectangles are assumed to be part of the root node, not separate nodes.


         procedure INITIAL ( A: nametype; x: elementtype; var C:
         MFSET );
             { initialize A to a set containing x only }
             begin
               C.names [x].setname : = A;
               C.names [x].nextelement := 0;
                 { null pointer at end of list of members of A }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (32 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                  C.setheaders [A].count := 1;
                  C.setheaders [A].firstelement := x
                end; { INITIAL }

         procedure MERGE ( A, B: nametype; var C: MFSET );
               { merge A and B, calling the result A or B, arbitrarily }
               var
                  i: 0..n; { used to find end of smaller list }
               begin
                  if C.setheaders [A ].count > C.setheaders
         [B].count then begin
                     { A is the larger set; merge B into A }
                     { find end of B, changing set names to A as we go }
                     i := C.setheaders[B].firstelement;
                     while C.names [i].nextelement <> 0 do
         begin
                        C.names [i].setname := A;
                        i := C.names [i].nextelement
                     end;
                     { append list A to the end of B and call the result A }
                     { now i is the index of the last member of B }
                     C.names [i].setname := A;
                     C.names [i].nextelement := C.setheaders [A
         ].firstelement;
                     C.setheaders [A ].firstelement := C.setheaders [B
         ].firstelement;
                     C.setheaders [A ].count := C.setheaders [A
         ].count +
                            C.setheaders [B ].count;
                     C.setheaders[B ].count := 0;
                     C.setheaders[B ].firstelement := 0
                          { above two steps not really necessary, as set B no longer exists }
                 end
                 else { B is at least as large as A }
                     { code similar to case above, but with A and B interchanged }
              end; { MERGE }

         function FIND ( x: 1..n; var C: MFSET );
             { return the name of the set of which x is a member }
             begin
                return ( C. names [x ].setname)
             end; { FIND }




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (33 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                                         Fig. 5.23. The operations of an MFSET.

            To find the set containing an element x, we first consult a mapping (e.g., an array)
         not shown in Fig. 5.25, to obtain a pointer to the node for x. We then follow the path
         from that node to the root of its tree and read the name of the set there.

             The basic merge operation is to make the root of one tree be a child of the root of
         the other. For example, we could merge A and B of Fig. 5.25 and call the result A, by
         making node 5 a child of node 1. The result is shown in Fig. 5.26. However,
         indiscriminate merging could result in a tree of n nodes that is a single chain. Then
         doing a FIND operation on each of those nodes would take O(n2) time. Observe that
         although a merge can be done in O(1) steps, the cost of a reasonable number of
         FIND's will dominate the total cost, and this approach is not necessarily better than
         the simplest one for executing n merges and n finds.

             However, a simple improvement guarantees that if n is the number of elements,
         then no FIND will take more than O(log n) steps. We simply keep at each root a
         count of the number of elements in the set, and when called upon to merge two sets,
         we make the root of the smaller tree be a child of the root of the larger. Thus, every
         time a node is moved to a new tree, two things happen: the distance from the node to
         its root increases by one, and the node will be in a set with at least twice as many
         elements as before. Thus, if n is the total number of elements, no node can be moved
         more than logn times; hence, the distance to its root can never exceed logn. We
         conclude that each FIND requires at most O(log n) time.


         Path Compression
         Another idea that may speed up this implementation of MFSET's is path
         compression. During a FIND, when following a path from some node to the root,
         make each node encountered along the path be a child of the root. The easiest way to
         do this is in two passes. First, find the root, and then retraverse the same path, making
         each node a child of the root.

         Example 5.7. Figure 5.27(a) shows a tree before executing a FIND operation on the
         node for element 7 and Fig. 5.27(b) shows the result after 5 and 7 are made children
         of the root. Nodes 1 and 2 on the path are not moved because 1 is the root, and 2 is
         already a child of the root.

            Path compression does not affect the cost of MERGE's; each MERGE still takes a
         constant amount of time. There is, however, a subtle speedup in FIND's since path
         compression tends to shorten a large number of paths from various nodes to the root



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (34 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         with relatively little effort.

            Unfortunately, it is very difficult to analyze the average cost of FIND's when path
         compression is used. It turns out that if we do not require that smaller trees be merged
         into larger ones, we require no more than O(n log n) time to do n FIND's. Of course,
         the first FIND may take O(n) time by itself for a tree consisting of one chain. But
         path compression can change a tree very rapidly and no matter in what order we
         apply FIND to elements of any tree no more than O(n) time is spent on n FIND's.
         However, there are




                                   Fig. 5.24. Example of the MFSET data structure.




                               Fig. 5.25. MFSET represented by a collection of trees.

         sequences of MERGE and FIND instructions that require Ω(nlog n) time.

            The algorithm that both uses path compression and merges the smaller tree into
         the larger is asymptotically the most efficient method known for implementing
         MFSET's. In particular, n FIND's require no more than O(nα(n)) time, where α(n) is
         a function that is not constant, yet grows much more slowly than logn. We shall
         define α(n) below, but the analysis that leads to this bound is beyond the scope of this
         book.




                                                  Fig. 5.26. Merging B into A.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (35 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                                       Fig. 5.27. An example of path compression.


         The Function α(n)
         The function α(n) is closely related to a very rapidly growing function A(x, y), known
         as Ackermann's function. A(x, y) is defined recursively by:

                   A(0,y) = 1 for y ≥ 0

                   A(1, 0) = 2

                   A(x, 0) = x+2 for x ≥ 2

                   A(x,y) = A(A(x-1, y),y-1) for x, y ≥ 1

         Each value of y defines a function of one variable. For example, the third line above
         tells us that for y=0, this function is "add 2." For y = 1, we have A(x, 1) = A(A(x-1,
         1),0) = A(x-1, 1) + 2, for x > 1, with A(1, 1) = A(A(0, 1),0) = A(1, 0) = 2. Thus A(x, 1)
         = 2x for all x ≥ 1. In other words, A(x, 1) is "multiply by 2." Then, A(x, 2) = A(A(x-1,
         2), 1) = 2A(x-1, 2) for x > 1. Also, A(1, 2) = A(A(0,2), 1) = A(1, 1) = 2. Thus A(x, 2) =
         2x. Similarly, we can show that A(x, 3) = 22...2 (stack of x 2's), while A(x, 4) is so
         rapidly growing there is no accepted mathematical notation for such a function.

            A single-variable Ackermann's function can be defined by letting A(x) = A(x, x).
         The function α(n) is a pseudo-inverse of this single variable function. That is, α(n) is
         the least x such that n ≤ A(x). For example, A(1) = 2, so α(1) = α(2) = 1. A(2) = 4, so
         α(3) = α(4) = 2. A(3) = 8, so α(5) = . . . = α(8) = 3. So far, α(n) seems to be growing
         rather steadily.

            However, A(4) is a stack of 65536 2's. Since log(A(4)) is a stack of 65535 2's, we
         cannot hope even to write A(4) explicitly, as it would take log(A(4)) bits to do so.
         Thus α(n) ≤ 4 for all integers n one is ever likely to encounter. Nevertheless, α(n)
         eventually reaches 5, 6, 7, . . . on its unimaginably slow course toward infinity.


         5.6 An ADT with MERGE and SPLIT

http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (36 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         Let S be a set whose members are ordered by the relation <. The operation SPLIT(S,
         S1, S2, x) partitions S into two sets: S1={ a  a is in S and a < x} and S2 = {a  a is in
         S and a ≥ x}. The value of S after the split is undefined, unless it is one of S1 or S2.
         There are several situations where the operation of splitting sets by comparing each
         member with a fixed value x is essential. We shall consider one such problem here.


         The Longest Common Subsequence
         Problem
         A subsequence of a sequence x is obtained by removing zero or more (not necessarily
         contiguous) elements from x. Given two sequences x and y, a longest common
         subsequence (LCS) is a longest sequence that is a subsequence of both x and y.

             For example, an LCS of 1, 2, 3, 2, 4, 1, 2 and 2, 4, 3, 1, 2, 1 is the subsequence 2,
         3, 2, 1, formed as shown in Fig. 5.28. There are other LCS's as well, such as 2, 4, 1, 2,
         but there are no common subsequences of length 5.




                                       Fig. 5.28. A longest common subsequence.

         There is a UNIX command called diff that compares files line-by-line, finding a
         longest common subsequence, where a line of a file is considered an element of the
         subsequence. That is, whole lines are analogous to the integers 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Fig.
         5.28. The assumption behind the command diff is that the lines of each file that are
         not in this LCS are lines inserted, deleted or modified in going from one file to the
         other. For example, if the two files are versions of the same program made several
         days apart, diff will, with high probability, find the changes.

            There are several general solutions to the LCS problem that work in O(n2) steps
         on sequences of length n. The command diff uses a different strategy that works well
         when the files do not have too many repetitions of any line. For example, programs
         will tend to have lines "begin" and "end" repeated many times, but other lines are not
         likely to repeat.

           The algorithm used by diff for finding an LCS makes use of an efficient
         implementation of sets with operations MERGE and SPLIT, to work in time



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (37 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         O(plogn), where n is the maximum number of lines in a file and p is the number of
         pairs of positions, one from each file, that have the same line. For example, p for the
         strings in Fig. 5.28 is 12. The two 1's in each string contribute four pairs, the 2's
         contribute six pairs, and 3 and 4 contribute one pair each. In the worst case, p,. could
         be n2, and this algorithm would take O(n2logn) time. However, in practice, p is
         usually closer to n, so we can expect an O(nlogn) time complexity.

            To begin the description of the algorithm let A = a1a2 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ an and B = b1b2 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ bm
         be the two strings whose LCS we desire. The first step is to tabulate for each value a,
         the positions of the string A at which a appears. That is, we define PLACES(a)= { i 
         a = ai }. We can compute the sets PLACES(a) by constructing a mapping from
         symbols to headers of lists of positions. By using a hash table, we can create the sets
         PLACES(a) in O(n) "steps" on the average, where a "step" is the time it takes to
         operate on a symbol, say to hash it or compare it with another. This time could be a
         constant if symbols are characters or integers, say. However, if the symbols of A and
         B are really lines of text, then steps take an amount of time that depends on the
         average length of a line of text.

             Having computed PLACES(a) for each symbol a that occurs in string A, we are
         ready to find an LCS. To simplify matters, we shall only show how to find the length
         of the LCS, leaving the actual construction of the LCS as an exercise. The algorithm
         considers each bj, for j = 1, 2, ... , m, in turn. After considering bj, we need to know,
         for each i between 0 and n, the length of the LCS of strings a1 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ai and b1 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ bj.

            We shall group values of i into sets Sk, for k = 0, 1, . . . , n, where Sk consists of all
         those integers i such that the LCS of a1 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ai and b1 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ bj has length k. Note that Sk
         will always be a set of consecutive integers, and the integers in Sk+1 are larger than
         those in Sk, for all k.

         Example 5.8. Consider Fig. 5.28, with j = 5. If we try to match zero symbols from
         the first string with the first five symbols of the second (24312), we naturally have an
         LCS of length 0, so 0 is in S0. If we use the first symbol from the first string, we can
         obtain an LCS of length 1, and if we use the first two symbols, 12, we can obtain an
         LCS of length 2. However, using 123, the first three symbols, still gives us an LCS of
         length 2 when matched against 24312. Proceeding in this manner, we discover S0 =
         {0}, S1 = {1}, S2 = {2, 3}, S3 = {4, 5, 6}, and S4 = {7}.

            Suppose that we have computed the Sk's for position j-1 of the second string and
         we wish to modify them to apply to position j. We consider the set PLACES(bj). For
         each r in PLACES(bj), we consider whether we can improve some of the LCS's by



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (38 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:32]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         adding the match between ar and bj to the LCS of a1 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ar- 1 and b1 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ bj. That is, if
         both r-1 and r are in Sk, then all s ≥ r in Sk really belong in Sk+1 when bj is
         considered. To see this we observe that we can obtain k matches between a1 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ar-1
         and bl ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ bj-1, to which we add a match between ar and bj. We can modify Sk and
         Sk+1 by the following steps.

               1. FIND(r) to get Sk.
               2. If FIND(r-1) is not Sk, then no benefit can be had by matching bj with ar. Skip
                  the remaining steps and do not modify Sk or Sk+1.
               3. If FIND(r-1) = Sk, apply SPLIT(Sk, Sk, S'k, r) to separate from Sk those
                  members greater than or equal to r.
               4. MERGE(S'k, Sk+1, Sk+1) to move these elements into Sk+1.

            It is important to consider the members of PLACES(bj) largest first. To see why,
         suppose for example that 7 and 9 are in PLACES(bj), and before bj is considered,
         S3={6, 7, 8, 9} and S4={10, 11}.

            If we consider 7 before 9, we split S3 into S3 = {6} and S'3 = {7, 8, 9}, then make
         S4 = {7, 8, 9, 10, 11}. If we then consider 9, we split S4 into S4={7, 8} and S'4 = {9,
         10, 11}, then merge 9, 10 and 11 into S5. We have thus moved 9 from S3 to S5 by
         considering only one more position in the second string, representing an
         impossibility. Intuitively, what has happened is that we have erroneously matched bj
         against both a7 and a9 in creating an imaginary LCS of length 5.

             In Fig. 5.29, we see a sketch of the algorithm that maintains the sets Sk as we scan
         the second string. To determine the length of an LCS, we need only execute FIND(n)
         at the end.


            procedure LCS;
             begin
         (1)   initialize S0 = {0, 1, ... , n} and Si = ↑ for i = 1, 2, ... , n;
         (2)   for j := 1 to n do { compute Sk's for position
         j}
         (3)        for r in PLACES(bj), largest first do begin
         (4)           k := FIND(r);
         (5)           if k = FIND(r-1) then begin { r is not
         smallest in Sk }




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (39 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         (6)                    SPLIT(Sk, Sk, S'k,
         r);
         (7)                    MERGE(S'k, Sk+1,
         Sk+1)
                      end
                   end
                end; { LCS }

                            Fig. 5.29. Sketch of longest common subsequence program.


         Time Analysis of the LCS Algorithm
         As we mentioned earlier, the algorithm of Fig. 5.29 is a useful approach only if there
         are not too many matches between symbols of the two strings. The measure of the
         number of matches is




         where |PLACES(bj)| denotes the number of elements in set PLACES(bj). In other
         words, p is the sum over all bj of the number of positions in the first string that match
         bj. Recall that in our discussion of file comparison, we expect p to be of the same
         order as m and n, the lengths of the two strings (files).

            It turns out that the 2-3 tree is a good structure for the sets Sk. We can initialize
         these sets, as in line (1) of Fig. 5.29, in O(n) steps. The FIND operation requires an
         array to serve as a mapping from positions r to the leaf for r and also requires
         pointers to parents in the 2-3 tree. The name of the set, i.e., k for Sk, can be kept at the
         root, so we can execute FIND in O(logn) steps by following parent pointers until we
         reach the root. Thus all executions of lines (4) and (5) together take O(plogn) time,
         since those lines are each executed exactly once for each match found.

             The MERGE operation of line (5) has the special property that every member of
         S'k is lower than every member of Sk+1, and we can take advantage of this fact when
         using 2-3 trees for an implementation.† To begin the MERGE, place the 2-3 tree for
         S'k to the left of that for Sk+1. If both are of the same height, create a new root with
         the roots of the two trees as children. If S'k is shorter, insert the root of that tree as the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (40 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         leftmost child of the leftmost node of Sk+1 at the appropriate level. If this node now
         has four children, we modify the tree exactly as in the INSERT procedure of Fig.
         5.20. An example is shown in Fig. 5.30. Similarly, if Sk+1 is shorter, make its root the
         rightmost child of the rightmost node of S'k at the appropriate level.




                                               Fig. 5.30. Example of MERGE.

            The SPLIT operation at r requires that we travel up the tree from leaf r,
         duplicating every interior node along the path and giving one copy to each of the two
         resulting trees. Nodes with no children are eliminated, and nodes with one child are
         removed and have that child inserted into the proper tree at the proper level.

         Example 5.9. Suppose we split the tree of Fig. 5.30(b) at node 9. The two trees, with
         duplicated nodes, are shown in Fig. 5.31(a). On the left, the parent of 8 has only one
         child, so 8 becomes a child of the parent of 6 and 7. This parent now has three
         children, so all is as it should be; if it had four children, a new node would have been
         created and inserted into the tree. We need only eliminate nodes with zero children
         (the old parent of 8) and the chain of nodes with one child leading to the root. The
         parent of 6, 7, and 8 becomes the new root, as shown in Fig. 5.31(b). Similarly, in the
         right-hand tree, 9 becomes a sibling of 10 and 11, and unnecessary nodes are
         eliminated, as is also shown in Fig. 5.31(b).




                                              Fig. 5.31. An example of SPLIT.

            If we do the splitting and reorganization of the 2-3 tree bottom up, it can be shown
         by consideration of a large number of cases that O(logn) steps suffices. Thus, the total
         time spent in lines (6) and (7) of Fig. 5.29 is O(plogn), and hence the entire algorithm
         takes O(plogn) steps. We must add in the preprocessing time needed to compute and
         sort PLACES(a) for symbols a. As we mentioned, if the symbols a are "large"



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (41 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




         objects, this time can be much greater than any other part of the algorithm. As we
         shall see in Chapter 8, if the symbols can be manipulated and compared in single
         "steps," then O(nlogn) time suffices to sort the first string a1a2 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ an (actually, to
         sort objects (i, ai) on the second field), whereupon PLACES(a) can be read off from
         this list in O(n) time. Thus, the length of the LCS can be computed in O(max(n, p)
         logn) time which, since p ≥ n is normal, can be taken as O(plogn).


         Exercises

                         Draw all possible binary search trees containing the four elements 1, 2,
                 5.1
                         3, 4.

                         Insert the integers 7, 2, 9, 0, 5, 6, 8, 1 into a binary search tree by
                 5.2
                         repeated application of the procedure INSERT of Fig. 5.3.

                 5.3     Show the result of deleting 7, then 2 from the final tree of Exercise 5.2.

                         When deleting two elements from a binary search tree using the
               *5.4      procedure of Fig. 5.5, does the final tree ever depend on the order in
                         which you delete them?

                         We wish to keep track of all 5-character substrings that occur in a given
                 5.5     string, using a trie. Show the trie that results when we insert the 14
                         substrings of length five of the string ABCDABACDEBACADEBA.

                         To implement Exercise 5.5, we could keep a pointer at each leaf, which,
                         say, represents string abcde, to the interior node representing the suffix
                         bcde. That way, if the next symbol, say f, is received, we don't have to
                         insert all of bcdef, starting at the root. Furthermore, having seen abcde,
               *5.6
                         we may as well create nodes for bcde, cde, de, and e, since we shall,
                         unless the sequence ends abruptly, need those nodes eventually. Modify
                         the trie data structure to maintain such pointers, and modify the trie
                         insertion algorithm to take advantage of this data structure.

                         Show the 2-3 tree that results if we insert into an empty set, represented
                 5.7
                         as a 2-3 tree, the elements 5, 2, 7, 0, 3, 4, 6, 1, 8, 9.

                         Show the result of deleting 3 from the 2-3 tree that results from Exercise
                 5.8
                         5.7.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (42 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                     Show the successive values of the various Si's when implementing the
                 5.9 LCS algorithm of Fig. 5.29 with first string abacabada, and second
                     string bdbacbad.

                         Suppose we use 2-3 trees to implement the MERGE and SPLIT
                         operations as in Section 5.6.

               5.10            a. Show the result of splitting the tree of Exercise 5.7 at 6.
                               b. Merge the tree of Exercise 5.7 with the tree consisting of leaves
                                  for elements 10 and 11.


                         Some of the structures discussed in this chapter can be modified easily
                         to support the MAPPING ADT. Write procedures MAKENULL,
                         ASSIGN, and COMPUTE to operate on the following data structures.

               5.11            a. Binary search trees. The "<" ordering applies to domain elements.
                               b. 2-3 trees. At interior nodes, place only the key field of domain
                                  elements.



                         Show that in any subtree of a binary search tree, the minimum element is
               5.12
                         at a node without a left child.

               5.13      Use Exercise 5.12 to produce a nonrecursive version of DELETE-MIN.

                         Write procedures ASSIGN, VALUEOF, MAKENULL and GETNEW
               5.14
                         for trie nodes represented as lists of cells.

                    How do the trie (list of cells implementation), the open hash table, and
              *5.15 the binary search tree compare for speed and for space utilization when
                    elements are strings of up to ten characters?

                    If elements of a set are ordered by a "<" relation, then we can keep one
                    or two elements (not just their keys) at interior nodes of a 2-3 tree, and
              *5.16
                    we then do not have to keep these elements at the leaves. Write INSERT
                    and DELETE procedures for 2-3 trees of this type.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (43 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                         Another modification we could make to 2-3 trees is to keep only keys at
                         interior nodes, but do not require that the keys k1 and k2 at a node truly
                         be the minimum keys of the second and third subtrees, just that all keys
                         k of the third subtree satisfy k ≥ k2, all keys k of the second satisfy k1 ≤ k
                         < k2, and all keys k of the first satisfy k < k1.
               5.17
                               a. How does this convention simplify the DELETE operation?
                               b. Which of the dictionary and mapping operations are made more
                                  complicated or less efficient?



                         Another data structure that supports dictionaries with the MIN operation
                         is the AVL tree (named for the inventors' initials) or height-balanced
                         tree. These trees are binary search trees in which the heights of two
              *5.18
                         siblings are not permitted to differ by more than one. Write procedures
                         to implement INSERT and DELETE, while maintaining the AVL-tree
                         property.

               5.19 Write the Pascal program for procedure delete1 of Fig. 5.21.

                         A finite automaton consists of a set of states, which we shall take to be
                         the integers 1..n and a table transitions[state, input] giving a next state
                         for each state and each input character. For our purposes, we shall
                         assume that the input is always either 0 or 1. Further, certain of the states
                         are designated accepting states. For our purposes, we shall assume that
                         all and only the even numbered states are accepting. Two states p and q
              *5.20      are equivalent if either they are the same state, or (i) they are both
                         accepting or both nonaccepting, (ii) on input 0 they transfer to
                         equivalent states, and (iii) on input 1 they transfer to equivalent states.
                         Intuitively, equivalent states behave the same on all sequences of inputs;
                         either both or neither lead to accepting states. Write a program using the
                         MFSET operations that computes the sets of equivalent states of a given
                         finite automaton.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (44 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                         In the tree implementation of MFSET:

                               a. Show that Ω(n log n) time is needed for certain lists of n
                                  operations if path compression is used but larger trees are
            **5.21                permitted to be merged into smaller ones.
                               b. Show that O(nα(n)) is the worst case running time for n
                                  operations if path compression is used, and the smaller tree is
                                  always merged into the larger.


                         Select a data structure and write a program to compute PLACES
               5.22
                         (defined in Section 5.6) in average time O(n) for strings of length n.

                         Modify the LCS procedure of Fig. 5.29 to compute the LCS, not just its
              *5.23
                         length.

              *5.24      Write a detailed SPLIT procedure to work on 2-3 trees.

                         If elements of a set represented by a 2-3 tree consist only of a key field,
                         an element whose key appears at an interior node need not appear at a
              *5.25
                         leaf. Rewrite the dictionary operations to take advantage of this fact and
                         avoid storing any element at two different nodes.


         Bibliographic Notes
         Tries were first proposed by Fredkin [1960]. Bayer and McCreight [1972] introduced
         B-trees, which, as we shall see in Chapter 11, are a generalization of 2-3 trees. The
         first uses of 2-3 trees were by J. E. Hopcroft in 1970 (unpublished) for insertion,
         deletion, concatenation, and splitting, and by Ullman [1974] for a code optimization
         problem.

            The tree structure of Section 5.5, using path compression and merging smaller into
         larger, was first used by M. D. McIlroy and R. Morris to construct minimum-cost
         spanning trees. The performance of the tree implementation of MFSET's was
         analyzed by Fischer [1972] and by Hopcroft and Ullman [1973]. Exercise 5.21(b) is
         from Tarjan [1975].

            The solution to the LCS problem of Section 5.6 is from Hunt and Szymanski
         [1977]. An efficient data structure for FIND, SPLIT, and the restricted MERGE
         (where all elements of one set are less than those of the other) is described in van
         Emde Boas, Kaas, and Zijlstra [1977].



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (45 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




            Exercise 5.6 is based on an efficient algorithm for matching patterns developed by
         Weiner [1973]. The 2-3 tree variant of Exercise 5.16 is discussed in detail in Wirth
         [1976]. The AVL tree structure in Exercise 5.18 is from Adel'son-Vel'skii and Landis
         [1962].

         † Recall the left child of the root is a descendant of itself, so we have not ruled out the
         possibility that x is at the left child of the root.

         † The highest-valued node among the descendants of the left child would do as well.

         † Recall that all logarithms are to the base 2 unless otherwise noted.

         † Trie was originally intended to be a homonym of "tree" but to distinguish these two
         terms many people prefer to pronounce trie as though it rhymes with "pie."

         † VALUEOF is a function version of COMPUTE in Section 2.5.

         † There is another version of 2-3 trees that places whole records at interior nodes, as a
         binary search tree does.

         † All nodes, however, take the largest amount of space needed for any variant types,
         so Pascal is not really the best language of implementing 2-3 trees in practice.M

         † A useful variant would take only a key value and delete any element with that key.

         † We say a is congruent to b modulo n if a and b have the same remainders when
         divided by n, or put another way, a-b is a multiple of n.

         † Note that n- 1 is the largest number of merges that can be performed before all
         elements are in one set.

         ‡ Note that our ability to call the resulting component by the name of either of its
         constituents is important here, although in the simpler implementation, the name of
         the first argument was always picked.

         † Strictly speaking we should use a different name for the MERGE operation, as the
         implementation we propose will not work to compute the arbitrary union of disjoint
         sets, while keeping the elements sorted so operations like SPLIT and FIND can be
         performed.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (46 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 5: Advanced Set Representation Methods




                                            Table of Contents            Go to Chapter 6




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1205.htm (47 of 47) [1.7.2001 19:09:33]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_1.gif [1.7.2001 19:09:42]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_3.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_3.gif [1.7.2001 19:09:57]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_7.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_7.gif [1.7.2001 19:10:04]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_10.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_10.gif [1.7.2001 19:10:13]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_13.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_13.gif [1.7.2001 19:10:19]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:10:28]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_16.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_16.gif [1.7.2001 19:10:44]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_20.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_20.gif [1.7.2001 19:10:48]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_21.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_21.gif [1.7.2001 19:10:53]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_22.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_22.gif [1.7.2001 19:10:59]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_24.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_24.gif [1.7.2001 19:11:14]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_25.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_25.gif [1.7.2001 19:11:36]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_27.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig4_27.gif [1.7.2001 19:11:53]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         Directed Graphs
         In problems arising in computer science, mathematics, engineering, and many other
         disciplines we often need to represent arbitrary relationships among data objects.
         Directed and undirected graphs are natural models of such relationships. This chapter
         presents the basic data structures that can be used to represent directed graphs. Some
         basic algorithms for determining the connectivity of directed graphs and for finding
         shortest paths are also presented.


         6.1 Basic Definitions
         A directed graph (digraph for short) G consists of a set of vertices V and a set of arcs
         E. The vertices are also called nodes or points; the arcs could be called directed edges
         or directed lines. An arc is an ordered pair of vertices (v, w); v is called the tail and w
         the head of the arc. The arc (v, w) is often expressed by v → w and drawn as




         Notice that the "arrowhead" is at the vertex called the "head" and the tail of the arrow
         is at the vertex called the "tail." We say that arc v → w is from v to w, and that w is
         adjacent to v.

         Example 6.1. Figure 6.1 shows a digraph with four vertices and five arcs.

              The vertices of a digraph can be used to represent objects, and the arcs
         relationships between the objects. For example, the vertices might represent cities
         and the arcs airplane flights from one city to another. As another example, which we
         introduced in Section 4.2, a digraph can be used to represent the flow of control in a
         computer program. The vertices represent basic blocks and the arcs possible transfers
         of flow of control.

             A path in a digraph is a sequence of vertices v1, v2, . . . , vn, such that v1 → v2, v2
         → v3, . . . , vn-1 → vn are arcs. This path is from vertex v1 to vertex vn, and passes
         through vertices v2, v3, . . . , vn-1, and ends at vertex vn. The length of a path is the
         number of arcs on the path, in this case, n-1. As a




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (1 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                                                    Fig. 6.1. Directed graph.

         special case, a single vertex v by itself denotes a path of length zero from v to v. In
         Fig. 6.1, the sequence 1, 2, 4 is a path of length 2 from vertex 1 to vertex 4.

              A path is simple if all vertices on the path, except possibly the first and last, are
         distinct. A simple cycle is a simple path of length at least one that begins and ends at
         the same vertex. In Fig. 6.1, the path 3, 2, 4, 3 is a cycle of length three.

              In many applications it is useful to attach information to the vertices and arcs of
         a digraph. For this purpose we can use a labeled digraph, a digraph in which each arc
         and/or each vertex can have an associated label. A label can be a name, a cost, or a
         value of any given data type.

         Example 6.2. Figure 6.2 shows a labeled digraph in which each arc is labeled by a
         letter that causes a transition from one vertex to another. This labeled digraph has the
         interesting property that the arc labels on every cycle from vertex 1 back to vertex 1
         spell out a string of a's and b's in which both the number of a's and b's is even.

             In a labeled digraph a vertex can have both a name and a label. Quite frequently,
         we shall use the vertex label as the name of the vertex. Thus, the numbers in Fig. 6.2
         could be interpreted as vertex names or vertex labels.


         6.2 Representations for Directed Graphs
         Several data structures can be used to represent a directed graph. The appropriate
         choice of data structure depends on the operations that will be applied to the vertices
         and arcs of the digraph. One common representation for a digraph G = (V,E) is the
         adjacency matrix. Suppose V = {1, 2 , . . . , n}. The adjacency matrix for G is an n x n
         matrix A of booleans, where A[i, j] is true if and only if there is an arc from vertex i
         to j. Often, we shall exhibit adjacency matrices with 1 for true and 0 for false;
         adjacency matrices may even be implemented that way. In the adjacency matrix
         representation the time required to access an element of an adjacency matrix is
         independent of the size of V and E. Thus the adjacency matrix




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (2 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                                                  Fig. 6.2. Transition digraph.

         representation is useful in those graph algorithms in which we frequently need to
         know whether a given arc is present.

              Closely related is the labeled adjacency matrix representation of a digraph,
         where A[i, j] is the label on the arc going from vertex i to vertex j. If there is no arc
         from i to j, then a value that cannot be a legitimate label must be used as the entry for
         A[i, j].

         Example 6.3. Figure 6.3 shows the labeled adjacency matrix for the digraph of Fig.
         6.2. Here, the label type is char, and a blank represents the absence of an arc.




                             Fig. 6.3. Labeled adjacency matrix for digraph of Fig. 6.2.

              The main disadvantage of using an adjacency matrix to represent a digraph is
         that the matrix requires Ω(n2) storage even if the digraph has many fewer than n2
         arcs. Simply to read in or examine the matrix would require O(n2) time, which would
         preclude O(n) algorithms for manipulating digraphs with O(n) arcs.

             To avoid this disadvantage we can use another common representation for a
         digraph G = (V,E) called the adjacency list representation. The adjacency list for a
         vertex i is a list, in some order, of all vertices adjacent to i. We can represent G by an
         array HEAD, where HEAD[i] is a pointer to the adjacency list for vertex i. The
         adjacency list representation of a digraph requires storage proportional to sum of the
         number of vertices plus the number of arcs; it is often used when the number of arcs
         is much less than n2. However, a potential disadvantage of the adjacency list
         representation is that it may take O(n) time to determine whether there is an arc from
         vertex i to vertex j, since there can be O(n) vertices on the adjacency list for vertex i.

         Example 6.4. Figure 6.4 shows an adjacency list representation for the digraph of



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (3 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         Fig. 6.1, where singly linked lists are used. If arcs had labels, these could be included
         in the cells of the linked list.




                          Fig. 6.4. Adjacency list representation for digraph of Fig. 6.1.

              If we did insertions and deletions from the adjacency lists, we might prefer to
         have the HEAD array point to header cells that did not contain adjacent vertices.†
         Alternatively, if the graph were expected to remain fixed, with no (or very few)
         changes to be made to the adjacency lists, we might prefer HEAD[i] to be a cursor to
         an array ADJ, where ADJ[HEAD[i]], ADJ[HEAD[i]+ 1] , . . . , and so on, contained
         the vertices adjacent to vertex i, up to that point in ADJ where we first encounter a 0,
         which marks the end of the list of adjacent vertices for i. For example, Fig. 6.1 could
         be represented as in Fig. 6.5.


         Directed Graph ADT's
         We could define an ADT corresponding to the directed graph formally and study
         implementations of its operations. We shall not pursue this direction extensively,
         because there is little of a surprising nature, and the principal data structures for
         graphs have already been covered. The most common operations on directed graphs
         include operations to read the label of a vertex or arc, to insert or delete vertices and
         arcs, and to navigate by following arcs




                             Fig. 6.5. Another adjacency list representation of Fig. 6.1.

         from tail to head.

              The latter operations require a little thought. Most frequently, we shall encounter
         in informal programs statements like


            for each vertex w adjacent to vertex v do                      (6.1)



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (4 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                         { some action on w }

         To implement such a step, we need the notion of an index type for the set of vertices
         adjacent to some one vertex v. For example, if adjacency lists are used to represent
         the graph, then an index is really a position on the adjacency list for v. If an
         adjacency matrix is used, an index is an integer representing an adjacent vertex. We
         need the following three operations on directed graphs.

               1. FIRST(v) returns the index for the first vertex adjacent to v. The index for the
                  null vertex Λ is returned if there is no vertex adjacent to v.
               2. NEXT(v, i) returns the index after index i for the vertices adjacent to v. Λ is
                  returned if i is the last index for vertices adjacent to v.
               3. VERTEX(v, i) returns the vertex with index i among the vertices adjacent to v.

         Example 6.5. If the adjacency matrix representation is chosen, VERTEX(v, i) returns
         i. FIRST(v) and NEXT(v, i) can be written as in Fig. 6.6 to operate on an externally
         defined n x n boolean matrix A. We assume A is declared


            array [1..n, 1..n] of boolean

         and that 0 is used for Λ. We can then implement the statement (6.1) as in Fig. 6.7.
         Note that FIRST(v) can also be implemented as NEXT(v, 0).


              function FIRST ( v: integer ): integer;
                var
                  i: integer;
                begin
                   for i := 1 to n do
                       if A[v, i] then
                           return (i);
                   return (0) { if we reach here, v has no adjacent vertex }
                end; { FIRST }

              function NEXT ( v: integer; i: integer ): integer;
                var
                  j: integer;
                begin
                   for j := i + 1 to n do
                       if A[v, j] then
                           return (j);
                   return (0)


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (5 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                 end; { NEXT }

                                      Fig. 6.6. Operations to scan adjacent vertices.


              i := FIRST(v);
              while i <> Λ do begin
                 w := VERTEX(v, i);
                 { some action on w }
                 i := NEXT(v, i)
              end

                                      Fig. 6.7. Iteration over vertices adjacent to v.


         6.3 The Single Source Shortest Paths
         Problem
         In this section we consider a common path-finding problem on directed graphs. We
         are given a directed graph G = (V, E) in which each arc has a nonnegative label, and
         one vertex is specified as the source. Our problem is to determine the cost of the
         shortest path from the source to every other vertex in V, where the length of a path is
         just the sum of the costs of the arcs on the path. This problem is often called the
         single-source shortest paths problem.† Note that we shall talk of paths as having
         "length" even if costs represent something different, like time.

              We might think of G as a map of airline flights, in which each vertex represents a
         city and each arc v → w an airline route from city v to city w. The label on arc v → w
         is the time to fly from v to w.‡ Solving the single-source shortest paths problem for
         this directed graph would determine the minimum travel time from a given city to
         every other city on the map.

              To solve this problem we shall use a "greedy" technique, often known as
         Dijkstra's algorithm. The algorithm works by maintaining a set S of vertices whose
         shortest distance from the source is already known. Initially, S contains only the
         source vertex. At each step, we add to S a remaining vertex v whose distance from
         the source is as short as possible. Assuming all arcs have nonnegative costs, we can
         always find a shortest path from the source to v that passes only through vertices in S.
         Call such a path special. At each step of the algorithm, we use an array D to record
         the length of the shortest special path to each vertex. Once S includes all vertices, all
         paths are "special," so D will hold the shortest distance from the source to each



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (6 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         vertex.

             The algorithm itself is given in Fig. 6.8. It assumes that we are given a directed
         graph G = (V, E) where V = {1, 2, . . . , n} and vertex 1 is the source. C is a two-
         dimensional array of costs, where C[i, j] is the cost of going from vertex i to vertex j
         on arc i → j. If there is no arc i → j, then we assume C[i, j] is ∞, some value much
         larger than any actual cost. At each step D [i] contains the length of the current
         shortest special path to vertex i.

         Example 6.6. Let us apply Dijkstra to the directed graph of Fig. 6.9. Initially, S =
         {1}, D[2] = 10, D[3] = ∞, D[4] = 30 and D[5] = 100. In the first iteration of the for-
         loop of lines (4)-(8), w = 2 is selected as the vertex with the minimum D value. Then
         we set D[3] = min(∞, 10+50)= 60. D(4) and D(5) do not change, because reaching
         them from 1 directly is shorter than going through vertex 2. The sequence of D-
         values after each iteration of the for-loop is shown in Fig. 6.10.

              If we wish to reconstruct the shortest path from the source to each vertex, then
         we can maintain another array P of vertices, such that P [v] contains the vertex
         immediately before vertex v in the shortest path. Initialize P[v] to 1 for all v ≠ 1. The
         P-array can be updated right after line (8) of Dijkstra. If D[w]+C[w,v]<D[v] at line
         (8), then we set P[v]:= w. Upon termination


               procedure Dijkstra;
                  { Dijkstra computes the cost of the shortest paths
                   from vertex 1 to every vertex of a directed graph }
               begin
         (1)       S := {1};
         (2)       for i := 2 to n do
         (3)          D[i] := C[1, i]; { initialize D }
         (4)       for i := 1 to n-1 do begin
         (5)          choose a vertex w in V-S such that
                        D[w] is a minimum;
         (6)          add w to S;
         (7)          for each vertex v in V-S do
         (8)              D[v] := min(D[v], D[w] +
         C[w, v])
                  end
               end; { Dijkstra }

                                                 Fig. 6.8. Dijkstra's algorithm.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (7 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                                             Fig. 6.9. Digraph with labeled arcs.

         of Dijkstra the path to each vertex can be found by tracing backward the predecessor
         vertices in the P-array.

         Example 6.7. For the digraph in Example 6.6 the P-array would have the values P[2]
         = 1, P[3] = 4, P[4] = 1, and P[5] = 3. To find the shortest path from vertex 1 to vertex
         5, for example, we would trace the predecessors in reverse order beginning at vertex
         5. From the P-array we determine 3 is the predecessor of 5, 4 the predecessor of 3,
         and 1 the predecessor of 4. Thus the shortest path from vertex 1 to vertex 5 is 1, 4, 3,
         5.




                             Fig. 6.10. Computation of Dijkstra on digraph of Fig. 6.9.


         Why Dijkstra's Algorithm Works
         Dijkstra's algorithm is an example where "greed" pays off, in the sense that what
         appears locally as the best thing to do turns out to be the best over all. In this case, the
         locally "best" thing to do is to find the distance to the vertex w that is outside S but
         has the shortest special path. To see why in this case there cannot be a shorter
         nonspecial path from the source to w, observe Fig. 6.11. There we show a
         hypothetical shorter path to w that first leaves S to go to vertex x, then (perhaps)
         wanders into and out of S several times before ultimately arriving at w.

             But if this path is shorter than the shortest special path to w, then the initial
         segment of the path from the source to x is a special path to x shorter than the shortest
         special path to w. (Notice how important the fact that costs are nonnegative is here;
         without it our argument wouldn't work, and in fact Dijkstra's algorithm would not
         work correctly.) In that case, when we selected w at line (5) of Fig. 6.8, we should
         have selected x instead, because D [x] was less than D [w].

              To complete a proof that Fig. 6.8 works, we should verify that at all times D [v]
         is truly the shortest distance of a special path to vertex v. The crux of this argument is


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (8 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         in observing that when we add a new vertex w to S at line (6), lines (7) and (8) adjust
         D to take account of the possibility that there is now a shorter special path to v going
         through w. If that path goes through the old S to w and then immediately to v, its cost,
         D [w]+C [w, v], will be compared with D [v] at line (8), and D [v] will be reduced if
         the new special path is shorter. The only other possibility for a shorter special path is
         shown in Fig. 6.12, where the path travels to w, then back into the old S, to some
         member x of the old S, then to v.

              But there really cannot be such a path. Since x was placed in S before w, the
         shortest of all paths from the source to x runs through the old S alone. Therefore, the
         path to x through w shown in Fig. 6.12 is no shorter than the path directly to x
         through S. As a result, the length of the path in Fig. 6.12 from the source to w, x, and
         v is no less from the old value of D [v], since D [v] was no greater than the length of
         the shortest path to x through S and then directly to v. Thus D [v] cannot be reduced
         at line (8) by a path through w and x as in Fig. 6.12, and we need not consider the
         length of such paths.




                                         Fig. 6.11. Hypothetical shorter path to w.




                                        Fig. 6.12. Impossible shortest special path.


         Running Time of Dijkstra's Algorithm
         Suppose Fig. 6.8 operates on a digraph with n vertices and e edges. If we use an
         adjacency matrix to represent the digraph, then the loop of lines (7) and (8) takes
         O(n) time, and it is executed n-1 times for a total time of O(n2). The rest of the
         algorithm is easily seen to require no more time than this.

             If e is much less than n2, we might do better by using an adjacency list
         representation of the digraph and using a priority queue implemented as a partially



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (9 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         ordered tree to organize the vertices in V-S. The loop of lines (7) and (8) can then be
         implemented by going down the adjacency list for w and updating the distances in the
         priority queue. A total of e updates will be made, each at a cost of O(logn) time, so
         the total time spent in lines (7) and (8) is now O(elogn), rather than O(n2).

             Lines (1)-(3) clearly take O(n) time, as do lines (4) and (6). Using the priority
         queue to represent V-S, lines (5)-(6) implement exactly the DELETEMIN operation,
         and each of the n-1 iterations of these lines requires O(logn) time.

             As a result, the total time spent on this version of Dijkstra's algorithm is bounded
         by O(elogn). This running time is considerably better than O(n2) if e is very small
         compared with n2.


         6.4 The All-Pairs Shortest Paths Problem
         Suppose we have a labeled digraph that gives the flying time on certain routes
         connecting cities, and we wish to construct a table that gives the shortest time
         required to fly from any one city to any other. We now have an instance of the all-
         pairs shortest paths (APSP) problem. To state the problem precisely, we are given a
         directed graph G = (V, E) in which each arc v → w has a non-negative cost C[v, w].
         The APSP problem is to find for each ordered pair of vertices (v, w) the smallest
         length of any path from v to w.

              We could solve this problem using Dijkstra's algorithm with each vertex in turn
         as the source. A more direct way of solving the problem is to use the following
         algorithm due to R. W. Floyd. For convenience, let us again assume the vertices in V
         are numbered 1, 2 , . . . , n. Floyd's algorithm uses an n x n matrix A in which to
         compute the lengths of the shortest paths. We initially set A[i, j] = C[i, j] for all i ≠ j.
         If there is no arc from i to j, we assume C[i, j] = ∞. Each diagonal element is set to 0.

              We then make n iterations over the A matrix. After the kth iteration, A[i, j] will
         have for its value the smallest length of any path from vertex i to vertex j that does
         not pass through a vertex numbered higher than k. That is to say, i and j, the end
         vertices on the path, may be any vertex, but any intermediate vertex on the path must
         be less than or equal to k.

                In the kth iteration we use the following formula to compute A.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (10 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         The subscript k denotes the value of the A matrix after the kth iteration, and it should
         not be assumed that there are n different matrices. We shall eliminate these subscripts
         shortly. This formula has the simple interpretation shown in Fig. 6.13.

             To compute Ak[i, j] we compare Ak- 1[i, j], the cost of going from i to j without
         going through k or any higher-numbered vertex, with Ak-1[i, k] + Ak- 1[k, j], the cost
         of going first from i to k and then from k to j, without passing through a vertex
         numbered higher than k. If passing through vertex k produces a cheaper path than
         what we had for Ak- 1[i, j], then we choose that cheaper cost for Ak[i, j].




                             Fig. 6.13. Including k among the vertices to go from i to j.

         Example 6.8. Consider the weighted digraph shown in Fig. 6.14. The values of the A
         matrix initially and after the three iterations are shown in Fig. 6.15.




                                                 Fig. 6.14. Weighted digraph.

                Since Ak[i, k] = Ak-1[i, k] and Ak[k, j] = Ak-1[k, j], no entry with either subscript
         equal to k changes during the kth iteration. Therefore, we can perform the
         computation with only one copy of the A matrix. A program to perform this
         computation on n x n matrices is shown in Fig. 6.16.

             The running time of this program is clearly O(n3), since the program is basically
         nothing more than a triply nested for-loop. To verify that this program works, it is
         easy to prove by induction on k that after k passes through the triple for-loop, A[i, j]
         holds the length of the shortest path from vertex i to vertex j that does not pass
         through a vertex numbered higher than k.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (11 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                                        Fig. 6.15. Values of successive A matrices.


             procedure Floyd ( var A: array[1..n, 1..n]
         of real;
                  C: array[1..n, 1..n] of real );
                { Floyd computes shortest path matrix A given arc cost matrix C }
                var
                  i, j, k: integer;
                begin
                  for i := 1 to n do
                      for j := 1 to n do
                          A[i, j] := C[i, j];
                  for i:= 1 to n do
                      A[i, i] := 0;
                  for k:= 1 to n do
                      for i := 1 to n do
                         for j:= 1 to n do
                            if A[i, k] + A[k, j] < A
         [i, j] then
                               A[i, j] := A[i, k] + A[k,
         j]
                end; { Floyd }

                                                  Fig. 6.16. Floyd's algorithm.


         Comparison Between Floyd's and
         Dijkstra's Algorithms
         Since the adjacency-matrix version of Dijkstra finds shortest paths from one vertex in
         O(n2) time, it, like Floyd's algorithm, can find all shortest paths in O(n3) time. The
         compiler, machine, and implementation details will determine the constants of
         proportionality. Experimentation and measurement are the easiest way to ascertain
         the best algorithm for the application at hand.

                If e, the number of edges, is very much less than n2, then despite the relatively



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (12 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         low constant factor in the O(n3) running time of Floyd, we would expect the
         adjacency list version of Dijkstra, taking O(ne logn) time to solve the APSP, to be
         superior, at least for large sparse graphs.


         Recovering the Paths
         In many situations we may want to print out the cheapest path from one vertex to
         another. One way to accomplish this is to use another matrix P, where P[i, j] holds
         that vertex k that led Floyd to find the smallest value of A[i, j]. If P[i, j]=0, then the
         shortest path from i to j is direct, following the arc from i to j. The modified version
         of Floyd in Fig. 6.17 stores the appropriate intermediate vertices into P.


             procedure shortest ( var A: array[1..n, 1..n]
         of real;
                C: array[1..n, 1..n] of real; P:
         array[1..n, 1..n] of integer );
                { shortest takes an n X n matrix C of arc costs and produces an
                   n X n matrix A of lengths of shortest paths and an n X n
         matrix
                   P giving a point in the "middle" of each shortest path }
                var
                   i, j, k: integer;
                begin
                   for i:= 1 to n do
                        for j := 1 to n do begin
                            A[i, j] := C[i, j];
                            P[i, j] := 0
                        end;
                   for i:= 1 to n do
                        A[i, i] := 0;
                   for k := 1 to n do
                        for i:= 1 to n do
                            for j:= 1 to n do
                               if A[i, k] + A[k, j] <
         A[i, j] then begin
                                   A[i, j] := A[i, k] + A[k,
         j];
                                   P[i, j] := k
                               end
                end; { shortest }




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (13 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                                              Fig. 6.17. Shortest paths program.

              To print out the intermediate vertices on the shortest path from vertex i to vertex
         j, we invoke the procedure path(i, j) where path is given in Fig. 6.18. While on an
         arbitrary matrix P, path could loop forever, if P comes from shortest, we could not,
         say, have k on the shortest path from i to j and also have j on the shortest path from i
         to k. Note how our assumption of nonnegative weights is again crucial.


              procedure path ( i, j: integer );
                var
                  k: integer;
                begin
                  k := P[i, j];
                  if k = 0 then
                      return;
                  path(i, k);
                  writeln(k);
                  path(k, j)
                end; { path }

                                        Fig. 6.18. Procedure to print shortest path.

         Example 6.9. Figure 6.19 shows the final P matrix for the digraph of Fig. 6.14.




                                       Fig. 6.19. P matrix for digraph of Fig. 6.14.


         Transitive Closure
         In some problems we may be interested in determining only whether there exists a
         path of length one or more from vertex i to vertex j. Floyd's algorithm can be
         specialized readily to this problem; the resulting algorithm, which predates Floyd's, is
         called Warshall's algorithm.

             Suppose our cost matrix C is just the adjacency matrix for the given digraph.
         That is, C[i, j] = 1 if there is an arc from i to j, and 0 otherwise. We wish to compute



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (14 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         the matrix A such that A[i, j] = 1 if there is a path of length one or more from i to j,
         and 0 otherwise. A is often called the transitive closure of the adjacency matrix.

         Example 6.10. Figure 6.20 shows the transitive closure for the adjacency matrix of
         the digraph of Fig. 6.14.

         The transitive closure can be computed using a procedure similar to Floyd by
         applying the following formula in the kth pass over the boolean A matrix.


            Ak[i, j] = Ak-1[i,
         j] or (Ak-1[i, k] and Ak-
         1[k, j])


         This formula states that there is a path from i to j not passing through a




                                                 Fig. 6.20. Transitive closure.

         vertex numbered higher than k if

               1. there is already a path from i to j not passing through a vertex numbered
                  higher than k- 1 or
               2. there is a path from i to k not passing through a vertex numbered higher than k
                  - 1 and a path from k to j not passing through a vertex numbered higher than k-
                  1.

            As before Ak[i, k] = Ak-1[i, k] and Ak[k, j] = Ak-1[k, j] so we can perform the
         computation with only one copy of the A matrix. The resulting Pascal program,
         named Warshall after its discoverer, is shown in Fig. 6.21.


             procedure Warshall ( var A: array[1..n, 1..n
         ] of boolean;
                 C: array[1..n, 1..n] of boolean );
               { Warshall makes A the transitive closure of C }
               var



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (15 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                 i, j, k: integer;
               begin
                 for i := 1 to n do
                      for j := 1 to n do
                          A[i, j] := C[i, j];
                 for k := 1 to n do
                     for i := 1 to n do
                         for j := 1 to n do
                            if A[i, j ] = false then
                                A[i, j] := A[i, k] and
         A[k, j]
               end; { Warshall }

                                 Fig. 6.21. Warshall's algorithm for transitive closure.


         An Example: Finding the Center of a
         Digraph
         Suppose we wish to determine the most central vertex in a digraph. This problem can
         be readily solved using Floyd's algorithm. First, let us make more precise the term
         "most central vertex." Let v be a vertex in a digraph G = (V, E). The eccentricity of v
         is




         The center of G is a vertex of minimum eccentricity. Thus, the center of a digraph is
         a vertex that is closest to the vertex most distant from it.

         Example 6.11. Consider the weighted digraph shown in Fig. 6.22.




                                                 Fig. 6.22. Weighted digraph.

         The eccentricities of the vertices are




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (16 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                         vertex       eccentricity
                          a            ∞
                          b            6
                          c            8
                          d            5
                          e            7

         Thus the center is vertex d.

                Finding the center of a digraph G is easy. Suppose C is the cost matrix for G.

               1. First apply the procedure Floyd of Fig. 6.16 to C to compute the all-pairs
                  shortest paths matrix A.
               2. Find the maximum cost in each column i. This gives us the eccentricity of
                  vertex i.
               3. Find a vertex with minimum eccentricity. This is the center of G.

         This running time of this process is dominated by the first step, which takes O(n3)
         time. Step (2) takes O(n2) time and step (3) O(n) time.

         Example 6.12. The APSP cost matrix for Fig. 6.22 is shown in Fig. 6.23. The
         maximum value in each column is shown below.




                                                  Fig. 6.23. APSP cost matrix.


         6.5 Traversals of Directed Graphs
         To solve many problems dealing with directed graphs efficiently we need to visit the
         vertices and arcs of a directed graph in a systematic fashion. Depth-first search, a
         generalization of the preorder traversal of a tree, is one important technique for doing
         so. Depth-first search can serve as a skeleton around which many other efficient
         graph algorithms can be built. The last two sections of this chapter contain several
         algorithms that use depth-first search as a foundation.

                Suppose we have a directed graph G in which all vertices are initially marked


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (17 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         unvisited. Depth-first search works by selecting one vertex v of G as a start vertex; v
         is marked visited. Then each unvisited vertex adjacent to v is searched in turn, using
         depth-first search recursively. Once all vertices that can be reached from v have been
         visited, the search of v is complete. If some vertices remain unvisited, we select an
         unvisited vertex as a new start vertex. We repeat this process until all vertices of G
         have been visited.

              This technique is called depth-first search because it continues searching in the
         forward (deeper) direction as long as possible. For example, suppose x is the most
         recently visited vertex. Depth-first search selects some unexplored arc x → y
         emanating from x. If y has been visited, the procedure looks for another unexplored
         arc emanating from x. If y has not been visited, then the procedure marks y visited
         and initiates a new search at y. After completing the search through all paths
         beginning at y, the search returns to x, the vertex from which y was first visited. The
         process of selecting unexplored arcs emanating from x is then continued until all arcs
         from x have been explored.

              An adjacency list L[v] can be used to represent the vertices adjacent to vertex v,
         and an array mark, whose elements are chosen from (visited, unvisited), can be used
         to determine whether a vertex has been previously visited. The recursive procedure
         dfs is outlined in Fig. 6.24. To use it on an n-vertex graph, we initialize mark to
         unvisited and then commence a depth-first search from each vertex that is still
         unvisited when its turn comes, by


            for v := 1 to n do
              mark[v] := unvisited;
            for v := 1 to n do
              if mark[v] = unvisited then
                 dfs( v )

         Note that Fig. 6.24 is a template to which we shall attach other actions later, as we
         apply depth-first search. The code in Fig. 6.24 doesn't do anything but set the mark
         array.


         Analysis of Depth-First Search
         All the calls to dfs in the depth-first search of a graph with e arcs and n ≤ e vertices
         take O(e) time. To see why, observe that on no vertex is dfs called more than once,
         because as soon as we call dfs(v) we set mark[v] to visited at line (1), and we never
         call dfs on a vertex that previously had its mark set to visited. Thus, the total time
         spent at lines (2)-(3) going down the adjacency lists is proportional to the sum of the


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (18 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         lengths of those lists, that is, O(e). Thus, assuming n≤e, the total time spent on the
         depth- first search of an entire graph is O(e), which is, to within a constant factor, the
         time needed merely to "look at" each arc.


                  procedure dfs ( v: vertex );
                   var
                      w: vertex;
                   begin
         (1)           mark[v]: = visited;
         (2)           for each vertex w on L[v] do
         (3)             if mark[w] = unvisited then
         (4)                dfs(w)
                   end; { dfs }

                                                 Fig. 6.24. Depth-first search.

         Example 6.13. Assume the procedure dfs(v) is applied to the directed graph of Fig.
         6.25 with v = A. The algorithm marks A visited and selects vertex B from the
         adjacency list of vertex A. Since B is unvisited, the search continues by calling dfs(B).
         The algorithm now marks B visited and selects the first vertex from the adjacency list
         for vertex B. Depending on the order of the vertices on the adjacency list of B the
         search will go to C or D next.

             Assuming that C appears ahead of D, dfs(C) is invoked. Vertex A is on the
         adjacency list of C. However, A is already visited at this point so the




                                                    Fig. 6.25. Directed graph.

         search remains at C. Since all vertices on the adjacency list at C have now been
         exhausted, the search returns to B, from which the search proceeds to D. Vertices A
         and C on the adjacency list of D were already visited, so the search returns to B and
         then to A.

             At this point the original call of dfs(A) is complete. However, the digraph has not
         been entirely searched; vertices E, F and G are still unvisited. To complete the
         search, we can call dfs(E).




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (19 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         The Depth-first Spanning Forest
         During a depth-first traversal of a directed graph, certain arcs, when traversed, lead to
         unvisited vertices. The arcs leading to new vertices are called tree arcs and they form
         a depth-first spanning forest for the given digraph. The solid arcs in Fig. 6.26 form a
         depth-first spanning forest for the digraph of Fig. 6.25. Note that the tree arcs must
         indeed form a forest, since a vertex cannot be unvisited when two different arcs to it
         are traversed.

               In addition to the tree arcs, there are three other types of arcs defined by a depth-
         first search of a directed graph. These are called back arcs, forward arcs, and cross
         arcs. An arc such as C → A is called a back arc, since it goes from a vertex to one of
         its ancestors in the spanning forest. Note that an arc from a vertex to itself is a back
         arc. A nontree arc that goes from a vertex to a proper descendant is called a forward
         arc. There are no forward arcs in Fig. 6.26.

              Arcs such as D → C or G → D, which go from a vertex to another vertex that is
         neither an ancestor nor a descendant, are called cross arcs. Observe that all cross arcs
         in Fig. 6.26 go from right to left, on the assumption that we add children to the tree in
         the order they were visited, from left to right, and that we add new trees to the forest
         from left to right. This pattern is not accidental. Had the arc G → D been the arc D →
         G, then G would have been unvisited when the search at D was in progress, and thus
         on encountering arc D → G, vertex G would have been made a descendant of D, and
         D → G would have become a tree arc.




                                  Fig. 6.26. Depth-first spanning forest for Fig. 6.25.

              How do we distinguish among the four types of arcs? Clearly tree arcs are
         special since they lead to unvisited vertices during the depth-first search. Suppose we
         number the vertices of a directed graph in the order in which we first mark them
         visited during a depth-first search. That is, we may assign to an array


                 dfnumber [v] := count;
                 count : = count + 1;

         after line (1) of Fig. 6.24. Let us call this the depth-first numbering of a directed



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (20 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         graph; notice how depth-first numbering generalizes the preorder numbering
         introduced in Section 3.1.

             All descendants of a vertex v are assigned depth-first search numbers greater
         than or equal to the number assigned v. In fact, w is a descendant of v if and only if
         dfnumber(v) ≤ dfnumber(w) ≤ dfnumber(v) + number of descendants of v. Thus,
         forward arcs go from low-numbered to high-numbered vertices and back arcs go
         from high-numbered to low-numbered vertices.

              All cross arcs go from high-numbered vertices to low-numbered vertices. To see
         this, suppose that x → y is an arc and dfnumber(x) ≤ dfnumber(y). Thus x is visited
         before y. Every vertex visited between the time dfs(x) is first invoked and the time
         dfs(x) is complete becomes a descendant of x in the depth-first spanning forest. If y is
         unvisited at the time arc x → y is explored, x → y becomes a tree arc. Otherwise, x →
         y is a forward arc. Thus there can be no cross arc x → y with dfnumber (x) ≤
         dfnumber (y).

             In the next two sections we shall show how depth- first search can be used in
         solving various graph problems.


         6.6 Directed Acyclic Graphs
         A directed acyclic graph, or dag for short, is a directed graph with no cycles.
         Measured in terms of the relationships they can represent, dags are more general than
         trees but less general than arbitrary directed graphs. Figure 6.27 gives an example of
         a tree, a dag, and a directed graph with a cycle.




                                               Fig. 6.27. Three directed graphs.

              Among other things, dags are useful in representing the syntactic structure of
         arithmetic expressions with common subexpressions. For example, Fig. 6.28 shows a
         dag for the expression

                      ((a+b)*c + ((a+b)+e) * (e+f)) * ((a+b)*c)

         The terms a+b and (a+b)*c are shared common subexpressions that are represented
         by vertices with more than one incoming arc.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (21 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




              Dags are also useful in representing partial orders. A partial order R on a set S is
         a binary relation such that

               1. for all a in S, a R a is false (R is irreflexive)
               2. for all a, b, c in S, if a R b and b R c, then a R c (R is transitive)

              Two natural examples of partial orders are the "less than" (<) relation on
         integers, and the relation of proper containment (⊂) on sets.

         Example 6.14. Let S = {1, 2, 3} and let P(S) be the power set of S, that is, the set of
         all subsets of S. P(S) = {Ø, {1}, {2}, {3}, {1,2}, {1,3}, {2,3}, {1,2,3}}. ⊂ is a partial
         order on P(S). Certainly, A ⊂ A is false for any set A (irreflexivity), and if A ⊂ B and
         B ⊂ C, then A ⊂ C (transitivity).

              Dags can be used to portray partial orders graphically. To begin, we can view a
         relation R as a set of pairs (arcs) such that (a, b) is in the set if and only if a R b is
         true. If R is a partial order on a set S, then the directed graph G = (S ,R) is a dag.
         Conversely, suppose G = (S ,R) is a dag and R+ is the relation defined by a R+ b if
         and only if there is a path of length one or




                                         Fig. 6.28. Dag for arithmetic expression.

         more from a to b. (R+ is the transitive closure of the relation R.) Then, R+ is a partial
         order on S.

         Example 6.15. Figure 6.29 shows a dag (P(S), R), where S = {1, 2 ,3}. The relation
         R+ is proper containment on the power set P(S).




                                          Fig. 6.29. Dag of proper containments.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (22 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         Test for Acyclicity
         Suppose we are given a directed graph G = (V, E), and we wish to determine whether
         G is acyclic, that is, whether G has no cycles. Depth-first search can be used to
         answer this question. If a back arc is encountered during a depth-first search of G,
         then clearly the graph has a cycle. Conversely, if a directed graph has a cycle, then a
         back arc will always be encountered in any depth-first search of the graph.

              To see this fact, suppose G is cyclic. If we do a depth-first search of G, there will
         be one vertex v having the lowest depth-first search number of any vertex on a cycle.
         Consider an arc u → v on some cycle containing v. Since u is on the cycle, u must be
         a descendant of v in the depth-first spanning forest. Thus, u → v cannot be a cross
         arc. Since the depth- first number of u is greater than the depth-first number of v, u →
         v cannot be a tree arc or a forward arc. Thus, u → v must be a back arc, as illustrated
         in Fig. 6.30.




                                        Fig. 6.30. Every cycle contains a back arc.


         Topological Sort
         A large project is often divided into a collection of smaller tasks, some of which have
         to be performed in certain specified orders so that we may complete the entire
         project. For example, a university curriculum may have courses that require other
         courses as prerequisites. Dags can be used to model such situations naturally. For
         example, we could have an arc from course C to course D if C is a prerequisite for D.

         Example 6.16. Figure 6.31 shows a dag giving the prerequisite structure on five
         courses. Course C3, for example, requires courses C1 and C2 as prerequisites.




                                                Fig. 6.31. Dag of prerequisites.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (23 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




              Topological sort is a process of assigning a linear ordering to the vertices of a
         dag so that if there is an arc from vertex i to vertex j, then i appears before j in the
         linear ordering. For example, C1, C2, C3, C4, C5 is a topological sort of the dag in
         Fig. 6.31. Taking the courses in this sequence would satisfy the prerequisite structure
         given in Fig. 6.31.

              Topological sort can be easily accomplished by adding a print statement after
         line (4) to the depth-first search procedure in Fig. 6.24:



                 procedure topsort ( v: vertex );

                     { print vertices accessible from v in reverse topological order }

                     var

                           w: vertex;

                     begin

                           mark[v] := visited;

                           for each vertex w on L[v] do

                               if mark[w] = unvisited then

                                      topsort(w) ;

                           writeln(v)

                     end; { topsort }



         When topsort finishes searching all vertices adjacent to a given vertex x, it prints x.
         The effect of calling topsort (v) is to print in a reverse topological order all vertices of
         a dag accessible from v by a path in the dag.

             This technique works because there are no back arcs in a dag. Consider what
         happens when depth-first search leaves a vertex x for the last time. The only arcs
         emanating from v are tree, forward, and cross arcs. But all these arcs are directed
         towards vertices that have already been completely visited by the search and
         therefore precede x in the order being constructed.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (24 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         6.7 Strong Components
         A strongly connected component of a directed graph is a maximal set of vertices in
         which there is a path from any one vertex in the set to any other vertex in the set.
         Depth-first search can be used to determine strongly connected components of a
         directed graph efficiently.

                   Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph. We can partition V into equivalence
         classes Vi, 1≤i≤r, such that vertices v and w are equivalent if and only if there is a
         path from v to w and a path from w to v. Let Ei, 1≤i≤r, be the set of arcs with head
         and tail in Vi. The graphs Gi = (Vi, Ei) are called the strongly connected components
         (or just strong components) of G. A directed graph with only one strong component
         is said to be strongly connected.

         Example 6.17. Figure 6.32 illustrates a directed graph with the two strong
         components shown in Fig. 6.33.




                                                    Fig. 6.32. Directed graph.




                           Fig. 6.33. The strong components of the digraph of Fig. 6.32.

              Note that every vertex of a directed graph G is in some strong component, but
         that certain arcs may not be in any component. Such arcs, called cross-component
         arcs, go from a vertex in one component to a vertex in another. We can represent the
         interconnections among the components by constructing a reduced graph for G. The
         vertices of the reduced graph are the strongly connected components of G. There is
         an arc from vertex C to a different vertex C' of the reduced graph if there is an arc in
         G from some vertex in the component C to some vertex in component C'. The



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (25 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         reduced graph is always a dag, because if there were a cycle, then all the components
         in the cycle would really be one strong component, meaning that we didn't compute
         strong components properly. Figure 6.34 shows the reduced graph for the digraph in
         Figure 6.32.

                 We shall now present an algorithm to find the strongly connected




                                                    Fig. 6.34. Reduced graph.

         components of a given directed graph G.

               1. Perform a depth-first search of G and number the vertices in order of
                  completion of the recursive calls; i.e., assign a number to vertex v after line (4)
                  of Fig. 6.24.

               2. Construct a new directed graph Gr by reversing the direction of every arc in
                  G.

               3. Perform a depth-first search on Gr starting the search from the highest-
                  numbered vertex according to the numbering assigned at step (1). If the depth-
                  first search does not reach all vertices, start the next depth-first search from
                  the highest-numbered remaining vertex.

               4. Each tree in the resulting spanning forest is a strongly connected component
                  of G.

         Example 6.18. Let us apply this algorithm to the directed graph of Fig. 6.32, starting
         at a and progressing first to b. After step (1) we number the vertices as shown in Fig.
         6.35. Reversing the direction of the arcs we obtain the directed graph Gr in Fig. 6.36.

             Performing the depth-first search on Gr we obtain the depth-first spanning forest
         shown in Fig. 6.37. We begin with a as a root, because a has the highest number.
         From a we can only reach c and then b. The next tree has root d, since that is the
         highest numbered (and only) remaining vertex. Each tree in this forest forms a
         strongly connected component of the original directed graph.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (26 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




             We have claimed that the vertices of a strongly connected component correspond
         precisely to the vertices of a tree in the spanning forest of the second depth-first
         search. To see why, observe that if v and w are vertices in the same strongly
         connected component, then there are paths in G from v to w and from w to v. Thus
         there are also paths from v to w and from w to v in Gr.

             Suppose that in the depth-first search of Gr, we begin a search at some root x and
         reach either v or w. Since v and w are reachable from each other,




                                                      Fig. 6.35. After step 1.




                                                             Fig. 6.36. Gr.




                                       Fig. 6.37.Depth-first spanning forest for Gr.

         both v and w will end up in the spanning tree with root x.

             Now suppose v and w are in the same spanning tree of the depth-first spanning
         forest of Gr. We must show that v and w are in the same strongly connected
         component. Let x be the root of the spanning tree containing v and w. Since v is a
         descendant of x, there exists a path in Gr from x to v. Thus there exists a path in G
         from v to x.

                In the construction of the depth-first spanning forest of Gr, vertex v was still



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (27 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         unvisited when the depth-first search at x was initiated. Thus x has a higher number
         than v, so in the depth-first search of G, the recursive call at v terminated before the
         recursive call at x did. But in the depth-first search of G, the search at v could not
         have started before x, since the path in G from v to x would then imply that the search
         at x would start and end before the search at v ended.

              We conclude that in the search of G, v is visited during the search of x and hence
         v is a descendant of x in the first depth-first spanning forest for G. Thus there exists a
         path from x to v in G. Therefore x and v are in the same strongly connected
         component. An identical argument shows that x and w are in the same strongly
         connected component and hence v and w are in the same strongly connected
         component, as shown by the path from v to x to w and the path from w to x to v.


         Exercises
                         a. adjacency matrices,

                         b. linked adjacency lists, and

                         c. adjacency lists represented as in Fig. 6.5.

                         a. Use the algorithm Dijkstra to find the shortest paths from a to
                            the other vertices.

                         b. Use the algorithm Floyd to find the shortest distances between
                            all pairs of points.  Also construct the matrix P that lets us
                            recover the shortest paths.


                       Represent the digraph of Fig. 6.38

                                       a. by an adjacency matrix giving arc costs.

                                       b. by a linked adjacency list with arc costs indicated.

                6.1




                                               Fig. 6.38. Directed graph with arc costs.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (28 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                    Describe a mathematical model for the following scheduling problem.
                    Given tasks T1, T2, . . . , Tn, which require times t1, t2, . . . , tn to
                6.2 complete, and a set of constraints, each of the form "Ti must be completed
                    prior to the start of Tj," find the minimum time necessary to complete all
                    tasks.

                       Implement the operations FIRST, NEXT, and VERTEX for digraphs
                6.3
                       represented by

                6.4    In the digraph of Fig. 6.38

                       Write a complete program for Dijkstra's algorithm using a partially
                6.5
                       ordered tree as a priority queue and linked adjacency lists.

                       Show that the program Dijkstra does not work correctly if arc costs can
              *6.6
                       be negative.

                       Show that the program Floyd still works if some of the arcs have negative
            **6.7
                       cost but no cycle has negative cost.

                       Assuming the order of the vertices is a, b , . . . , f in Fig. 6.38, construct a
                6.8    depth-first spanning forest; indicate the tree, forward, back and cross arcs,
                       and indicate the depth-first numbering of the vertices.

                       Suppose we are given a depth-first spanning forest, and we list in
                       postorder each of the spanning trees (trees composed of spanning edges),
              *6.9     from the leftmost to the rightmost. Show that this order is the same as the
                       order in which the calls of dfs ended when the spanning forest was
                       constructed.

                       A root of a dag is a vertex r such that every vertex of the dag can be
              6.10     reached by a directed path from r. Write a program to determine whether
                       a dag is rooted.

                       Consider a dag with e arcs and with two distinguished vertices s and t.
                       Construct an O (e) algorithm to find a maximal set of vertex disjoint paths
            *6.11
                       from s to t. By maximal we mean no additional path may be added, but it
                       does not mean that it is the largest size such set.

                       Construct an algorithm to convert an expression tree with operators + and
              6.12     * into a dag by sharing common subexpressions. What is the time
                       complexity of your algorithm?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (29 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




                       Construct an algorithm for evaluating an arithmetic expression
              6.13
                       represented as a dag.

                       Write a program to find the longest path in a dag. What is the time
              6.14
                       complexity of your program?

              6.15     Find the strong components of Fig. 6.38.

                       Prove that the reduced graph of the strong components of Section 6.7
            *6.16
                       must be a dag.

                       Draw the first spanning forest, the reverse graph, and the second spanning
              6.17     forest developed by the strong components algorithm applied to the
                       digraph of Fig. 6.38.

              6.18     Implement the strong components algorithm discussed in Section 6.7.

                       Show that the strong components algorithm takes time O (e) on a directed
            *6.19
                       graph of e arcs and n vertices, assuming n ≤ e.

                       Write a program that takes as input a digraph and two of its vertices. The
            *6.20      program is to print all simple paths from one vertex to the other. What is
                       the time complexity of your program?

                       A transitive reduction of a directed graph G = (V, E) is any graph G' with
                       the same vertices but with as few arcs as possible, such that the transitive
            *6.21
                       closure of G' is the same as the transitive closure of G. how that if G is a
                       dag, then the transitive reduction of G is unique.

                       Write a program to compute the transitive reduction of a digraph. What is
            *6.22
                       the time complexity of your program?

                       G' = (V, E') is called a minimal equivalent digraph for a digraph G = (V,
                       E) if E' is a smallest subset of E and the transitive closure of both G and
            *6.23
                       G' are the same. Show that if G is acyclic, then there is only one minimal
                       equivalent digraph, namely, the transitive reduction.

                       Write a program to find a minimal equivalent digraph for a given digraph.
            *6.24
                       What is the time complexity of your program?

                       Write a program to find the longest simple path from a given vertex of a
            *6.25
                       digraph. What is the time complexity of your program?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (30 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 6: Directed Graphs




         Bibliographic Notes
         Berge [1958] and Harary [1969] are two good sources for additional material on
         graph theory. Some books treating graph algorithms are Deo [1975], Even [1980],
         and Tarjan [1983].

             The single-source shortest paths algorithm in Section 6.3 is from Dijkstra [1959].
         The all-pairs shortest paths algorithm is from Floyd [1962] and the transitive closure
         algorithm is from Warshall [1962]. Johnson [1977] discusses efficient algorithms for
         finding shortest paths in sparse graphs. Knuth [1968] contains additional material on
         topological sort.

             The strong components algorithm of Section 6.7 is similar to one suggested by
         R. Kosaraju in 1978 (unpublished), and to one published by Sharir [1981]. Tarjan
         [1972] contains another strong components algorithm that needs only one depth-first
         search traversal.

              Coffman [1976] contains many examples of how digraphs can be used to model
         scheduling problems as in Exercise 6.2. Aho, Garey, and Ullman [1972] show that
         the transitive reduction of a dag is unique, and that computing the transitive reduction
         of a digraph is computationally equivalent to computing the transitive closure
         (Exercises 6.21 and 6.22). Finding the minimal equivalent digraph (Exercises 6.23
         and 6.24), on the other hand, appears to be computationally much harder; this
         problem is NP-complete [Sahni (1974)].

         † This is another manifestation of the old Pascal problem of doing insertion and
         deletion at arbitrary positions of singly linked lists.

         † One might expect that a more natural problem is to find the shortest path from the
         source to one particular destination vertex. However, that problem appears just as
         hard in general as the single-source shortest paths problem (except that by luck we
         may find the path to the destination before some of the other vertices and thereby
         terminate the algorithm a bit earlier than if we wanted paths to all the vertices).

         ‡ We might assume that an undirected graph would be used here, since the label on
         arcs v → w and w → v would be the same. However, in fact, travel times are different
         in different directions because of prevailing winds. Anyway, assuming that labels on
         v → w and w → v are identical doesn't seem to help solve the problem.

                                            Table of Contents           Go to Chapter 7




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1206.htm (31 of 31) [1.7.2001 19:12:41]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_1.gif [1.7.2001 19:12:46]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_6.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_6.gif [1.7.2001 19:12:50]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_7.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_7.gif [1.7.2001 19:12:55]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_9.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_9.gif [1.7.2001 19:13:03]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_12.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_12.gif [1.7.2001 19:13:06]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_13.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_13.gif [1.7.2001 19:13:14]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_14.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_14.gif [1.7.2001 19:13:22]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:13:35]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_16.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_16.gif [1.7.2001 19:13:50]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_24.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_24.gif [1.7.2001 19:14:05]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_25.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_25.gif [1.7.2001 19:14:09]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_26.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_26.gif [1.7.2001 19:14:17]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_27.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_27.gif [1.7.2001 19:14:23]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_28.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_28.gif [1.7.2001 19:14:31]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_30.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_30.gif [1.7.2001 19:14:44]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_31.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f5_31.gif [1.7.2001 19:15:09]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




         Undirected Graphs
         An undirected graph G = (V, E) consists of a finite set of vertices V and a set of edges
         E. It differs from a directed graph in that each edge in E is an unordered pair of
         vertices.† If (v, w) is an undirected edge, then (v, w) = (w, v). Hereafter we refer to an
         undirected graph as simply a graph.

             Graphs are used in many different disciplines to model a symmetric relationship
         between objects. The objects are represented by the vertices of the graph and two
         objects are connected by an edge if the objects are related. In this chapter we present
         several data structures that can be used to represent graphs. We then present
         algorithms for three typical problems involving undirected graphs: constructing
         minimal spanning trees, biconnected components, and maximal matchings.


         7.1 Definitions
         Much of the terminology for directed graphs is also applicable to undirected graphs.
         For example, vertices v and w are adjacent if (v, w) is an edge [or, equivalently, if (w,
         v) is an edge]. We say the edge (v, w) is incident upon vertices v and w.

              A path is a sequence of vertices v1, v2, . . . , vn such that (vi, vi+1) is an edge for 1
         ≤ i < n. A path is simple if all vertices on the path are distinct, with the exception that
         v1 and vn may be the same. The length of the path is n-1, the number of edges along
         the path. We say the path v1, v2, . . . , vn connects v1 and vn. A graph is connected if
         every pair of its vertices is connected.

             Let G = (V, E) be a graph with vertex set V and edge set E. A subgraph of G is a
         graph G' = (V', E') where

               1. V' is a subset of V.
               2. E' consists of edges (v, w) in E such that both v and w are in V'.

         If E' consists of all edges (v, w) in E, such that both v and w are in V', then G' is called
         an induced subgraph of G.

         Example 7.1. In Fig. 7.1(a) we see a graph G = (V, E) with V = {a, b, c, d} and E =
         {(a, b), (a, d), (b, c), (b, d), (c, d)}. In Fig. 7.1(b) we see one of its induced subgraphs,
         the one defined by the set of vertices {a, b, c} and all the edges in Fig. 7.1(a) that are
         not incident upon vertex d.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (1 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




                                        Fig. 7.1. A graph and one of its subgraphs.

              A connected component of a graph G is a maximal connected induced subgraph,
         that is, a connected induced subgraph that is not itself a proper subgraph of any other
         connected subgraph of G.

         Example 7.2 Figure 7.1 is a connected graph. It has only one connected component,
         namely itself. Figure 7.2 is a graph with two connected components.




                                               Fig. 7.2. An unconnected graph.

              A (simple) cycle in a graph is a (simple) path of length three or more that
         connects a vertex to itself. We do not consider paths of the form v (path of length 0),
         v, v (path of length 1), or v, w, v (path of length 2) to be cycles. A graph is cyclic if it
         contains at least one cycle. A connected, acyclic graph is sometimes called a free tree.
         Figure 7.2 shows a graph consisting of two connected components where each
         connected component is a free tree. A free tree can be made into an ordinary tree if
         we pick any vertex we wish as the root and orient each edge from the root.

               Free trees have two important properties, which we shall use in the next section.

               1. Every free tree with n ≥ 1 vertices contains exactly n-1 edges.
               2. If we add any edge to a free tree, we get a cycle.

         We can prove (1) by induction on n, or what is equivalent, by an argument concerning
         the "smallest counterexample." Suppose G = (V, E) is a counterexample to (1) with
         the fewest vertices, say n vertices. Now n cannot be 1, because the only free tree on
         one vertex has zero edges, and (1) is satisfied. Therefore, n must be greater than 1.

              We now claim that in the free tree there must be some vertex with exactly one
         incident edge. In proof, no vertex can have zero incident edges, or G would not be
         connected. Suppose every vertex has at least two edges incident. Then, start at some
         vertex v1, and follow any edge from v1. At each step, leave a vertex by a different
         edge from the one used to enter it, thereby forming a path v1, v2, v3, . . ..




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (2 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




              Since there are only a finite number of vertices in V, all vertices on this path
         cannot be distinct; eventually, we find vi = vj for some i < j. We cannot have i = j-1
         because there are no loops from a vertex to itself, and we cannot have i = j-2 or else
         we entered and left vertex vi+1 on the same edge. Thus, i ≤ j-3, and we have a cycle vi,
         vi+1, . . . , vj = vi. Thus, we have contradicted the hypothesis that G had no vertex with
         only one edge incident, and therefore conclude that such a vertex v with edge (v, w)
         exists.

             Now consider the graph G' formed by deleting vertex v and edge (v, w) from G.
         G' cannot contradict (1), because if it did, it would be a smaller counterexample than
         G. Therefore, G' has n-1 vertices and n-2 edges. But G has one more edge and one
         more vertex than G', so G has n-1 edges, proving that G does indeed satisfy (1). Since
         there is no smallest counterexample to (1), we conclude there can be no
         counterexample at all, so (1) is true.

              Now we can easily prove statement (2), that adding an edge to a free tree forms a
         cycle. If not, the result of adding the edge to a free tree of n vertices would be a graph
         with n vertices and n edges. This graph would still be connected, and we supposed
         that adding the edge left the graph acyclic. Thus we would have a free tree whose
         vertex and edge count did not satisfy condition (1).


         Methods of Representation
         The methods of representing directed graphs can be used to represent undirected
         graphs. One simply represents an undirected edge between v and w by two directed
         edges, one from v to w and the other from w to v.

         Example 7.3. The adjacency matrix and adjacency list representations for the graph
         of Fig. 7.1(a) are shown in Fig. 7.3.

             Clearly, the adjacency matrix for a graph is symmetric. In the adjacency list
         representation if (i, j) is an edge, then vertex j is on the list for vertex i and vertex i is
         on the list for vertex j.




                                                    Fig. 7.3. Representations.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (3 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




         7.2 Minimum-Cost Spanning Trees
         Suppose G = (V, E) is a connected graph in which each edge (u, v) in E has a cost c(u,
         v) attached to it. A spanning tree for G is a free tree that connects all the vertices in V.
         The cost of a spanning tree is the sum of the costs of the edges in the tree. In this
         section we shall show how to find a minimum-cost spanning tree for G.

         Example 7.4. Figure 7.4 shows a weighted graph and its minimum-cost spanning
         tree.

              A typical application for minimum-cost spanning trees occurs in the design of
         communications networks. The vertices of a graph represent cities and the edges
         possible communications links between the cities. The cost associated with an edge
         represents the cost of selecting that link for the network. A minimum-cost spanning
         tree represents a communications network that connects all the cities at minimal cost.




                                            Fig. 7.4. A graph and spanning tree.


         The MST Property
         There are several different ways to construct a minimum-cost spanning tree. Many of
         these methods use the following property of minimum-cost spanning trees, which we
         call the MST property. Let G = (V, E) be a connected graph with a cost function
         defined on the edges. Let U be some proper subset of the set of vertices V. If (u, v) is
         an edge of lowest cost such that u ∈ U and v ∈ V-U, then there is a minimum-cost
         spanning tree that includes (u, v) as an edge.

              The proof that every minimum-cost spanning tree satisfies the MST property is
         not hard. Suppose to the contrary that there is no minimum-cost spanning tree for G
         that includes (u, v). Let T be any minimum-cost spanning tree for G. Adding (u, v) to
         T must introduce a cycle, since T is a free tree and therefore satisfies property (2) for
         free trees. This cycle involves edge (u, v). Thus, there must be another edge (u', v') in
         T such that u' ∈ U and v' ∈ V-U, as illustrated in Fig. 7.5. If not, there would be no
         way for the cycle to get from u to v without following the edge (u, v) a second time.

               Deleting the edge (u', v') breaks the cycle and yields a spanning tree T' whose



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (4 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




         cost is certainly no higher than the cost of T since by assumption c(u, v) ≤ c(u', v').
         Thus, T' contradicts our assumption that there is no minimum-cost spanning tree that
         includes (u, v).


         Prim's Algorithm
         There are two popular techniques that exploit the MST property to construct a
         minimum-cost spanning tree from a weighted graph G = (V, E). One such method is
         known as Prim's algorithm. Suppose V = {1, 2, . . . , n}. Prim's algorithm begins with
         a set U initialized to {1}. It then "grows" a spanning tree, one edge at a time. At each
         step, it finds a shortest edge (u, v) that connects U and V-U and then adds v, the vertex
         in V-U, to U. It repeats this




                                                    Fig. 7.5. Resulting cycle.

         step until U = V. The algorithm is summarized in Fig. 7.6 and the sequence of edges
         added to T for the graph of Fig. 7.4(a) is shown in Fig. 7.7.


                procedure Prim ( G: graph; var T: set of edges );
                  { Prim constructs a minimum-cost spanning tree T for G }
                  var
                     U: set of vertices;
                     u, v: vertex;
                  begin
                    T:= Ø;
                    U := {1};
                    while U ≠ V do begin
                         let (u, v) be a lowest cost edge such that
                             u is in U and v is in V-U;
                      T := T ∪ {(u, v)};
                      U := U ∪ {v}
                    end
                 end; { Prim }


                                            Fig. 7.6. Sketch of Prim's algorithm.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (5 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




             One simple way to find the lowest-cost edge between U and V-U at each step is
         to maintain two arrays. One array CLOSEST[i] gives the vertex in U that is currently
         closest to vertex i in V-U. The other array LOWCOST[i] gives the cost of the edge (i,
         CLOSEST[i]).

             At each step we can scan LOWCOST to find the vertex, say k, in V-U that is
         closest to U. We print the edge (k, CLOSEST[k]). We then update the LOWCOST and
         CLOSEST arrays, taking into account the fact that k has been




                              Fig. 7.7. Seqeunces of edges added by Prim's algorithm.

         added to U. A Pascal version of this algorithm is given in Fig. 7.8. We assume C is an
         n x n array such that C[i, j] is the cost of edge (i, j). If edge (i, j) does not exist, we
         assume C[i, j] is some appropriate large value.

              Whenever we find another vertex k for the spanning tree, we make LOWCOST[k]
         be infinity, a very large value, so this vertex will no longer be considered in
         subsequent passes for inclusion in U. The value infinity is greater than the cost of any
         edge or the cost associated with a missing edge.

              The time complexity of Prim's algorithm is O(n2), since we make n-1 iterations
         of the loop of lines (4)-(16) and each iteration of the loop takes O(n) time, due to the
         inner loops of lines (7)-(10) and (13)-(16). As n gets large the performance of this
         algorithm may become unsatisfactory. We now give another algorithm due to Kruskal
         for finding minimum-cost spanning trees whose performance is at most O(eloge),
         where e is the number of edges in the given graph. If e is much less than n2, Kruskal's
         algorithm is superior, although if e is about n2, we would prefer Prim's algorithm.


              procedure Prim ( C: array[l..n, 1..n] of
         real );
                 { Prim prints the edges of a minimum-cost spanning tree for a graph
                    with vertices {1, 2, . . . , n} and cost matrix C on edges }
                 var
                    LOWCOST: array[1..n] of real;
                    CLOSEST: array[1..n] of integer;
                    i, j, k, min; integer;



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (6 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




                      { i and j are indices. During a scan of the LOWCOST array,
                          k is the index of the closest vertex found so far, and
                          min = LOWCOST[k] }
                   begin
          (1)          for i := 2 to n do begin
                          { initialize with only vertex 1 in the set U }
          (2)              LOWCOST[i] := C[1, i];
          (3)              CLOSEST[i] := 1
                      end;
          (4)          for i := 2 to n do begin
                          { find the closest vertex k outside of U to
                              some vertex in U }
          (5)              min := LOWCOST[2];
          (6)              k := 2;
          (7)              for j := 3 to n do
          (8)                  if LOWCOST[j] < min then begin
          (9)                      min := LOWCOST[j];
         (10)                      k := j
                              end;
         (11)               writeln(k, CLOSEST[k]); { print edge }
         (12)               LOWCOST[k] := infinity; { k is added to U }
         (13)               for j := 2 to n do { adjust costs to U }
         (14)                   if (C[k, j] < LOWCOST[j]) and
                                (LOWCOST[j] < infinity) then begin
         (15)                      LOWCOST[j] := C[k, j];
         (16)                      CLOSEST[j] := k
                              end
                      end
                   end; { Prim }

                                                   Fig. 7.8. Prim's algorithm.


         Kruskal's Algorithm
         Suppose again we are given a connected graph G = (V, E), with V = {1, 2, . . . , n} and
         a cost function c defined on the edges of E. Another way to construct a minimum-cost
         spanning tree for G is to start with a graph T = (V, Ø) consisting only of the n vertices
         of G and having no edges. Each vertex is therefore in a connected component by
         itself. As the algorithm proceeds, we shall always have a collection of connected
         components, and for each component we shall have selected edges that form a
         spanning tree.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (7 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




              To build progressively larger components, we examine edges from E, in order of
         increasing cost. If the edge connects two vertices in two different connected
         components, then we add the edge to T. If the edge connects two vertices in the same
         component, then we discard the edge, since it would cause a cycle if we added it to
         the spanning tree for that connected component. When all vertices are in one
         component, T is a minimum-cost spanning tree for G.

         Example 7.5. Consider the weighted graph of Fig. 7.4(a). The sequence of edges
         added to T is shown in Fig. 7.9. The edges of cost 1, 2, 3, and 4 are considered first,
         and all are accepted, since none of them causes a cycle. The edges (1, 4) and (3, 4) of
         cost 5 cannot be accepted, because they connect vertices in the same component in
         Fig. 7.9(d), and therefore would complete a cycle. However, the remaining edge of
         cost 5, namely (2, 3), does not create a cycle. Once it is accepted, we are done.

              We can implement this algorithm using sets and set operations discussed in
         Chapters 4 and 5. First, we need a set consisting of the edges in E. We then apply the
         DELETEMIN operator repeatedly to this set to select edges in order of increasing
         cost. The set of edges therefore forms a priority queue, and a partially ordered tree is
         an appropriate data structure to use here.

             We also need to maintain a set of connected components C. The operations we
         apply to it are:

               1. MERGE(A, B, C) to merge the components A and B in C and to call the result
                  either A or B arbitrarily.†
               2. FIND(v, C) to return the name of the component of C of which vertex v is a
                  member. This operation will be used to determine whether the two vertices of
                  an edge are in the same or different components.
               3. INITIAL(A, v, C) to make A the name of a component in C containing only
                  vertex v initially.

              These are the operations of the MERGE-FIND ADT called MFSET, which we
         encountered in Section 5.5. A sketch of a program called Kruskal to find a minimum-
         cost spanning tree using these operations is shown in Fig. 7.10.

              We can use the techniques of Section 5.5 to implement the operations used in this
         program. The running time of this program is dependent on two factors. If there are e
         edges, it takes O(eloge) time to insert the edges into the priority queue.‡ In each
         iteration of the while-loop, finding the least cost




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (8 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




                             Fig. 7.9. Sequence of edges added by Kruskal's algorithm.

         edge in edges takes O(log e) time. Thus, the priority queue operations take O(e log e)
         time in the worst case. The total time required to perform the MERGE and FIND
         operations depends on the method used to implement the MFSET. As shown in
         Section 5.5, there are O(e log e) and O(e α (e)) methods. In either case, Kruskal's
         algorithm can be implemented to run in O(e log e) time.


         7.3 Traversals
         In a number of graph problems, we need to visit the vertices of a graph
         systematically. Depth-first search and breadth-first search, the subjects of this section,
         are two important techniques for doing this. Both techniques can be used to determine
         efficiently all vertices that are connected to a given vertex.


                procedure Kruskal ( V: SET of vertex;
                    E: SET of edges;
                    var T: SET of edges );
                 var
                    ncomp: integer; { current number of components }
                    edges: PRIORITYQUEUE; { the set of edges }
                    components: MFSET; { the set V grouped into
                     a MERGE-FIND set of components }
                    u, v: vertex;
                    e: edge;
                    nextcomp: integer; { name for new component }
                    ucomp, vcomp: integer; { component names }

                   begin
                     MAKENULL(T);
                     MAKENULL(edges);
                     nextcomp := 0;
                     ncomp := number of members of V;
                     for v in V do begin { initialize a
                      component to contain one vertex of V }
                      nextcomp := nextcomp + 1;


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (9 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




                     INITIAL( nextcomp, v, components)
                    end;
                    for e in E do { initialize priority queue of edges }
                     INSERT(e, edges);
                    while ncomp > 1 do begin { consider next edge }
                     e := DELETEMIN(edges);
                     let e = (u, v);
                     ucomp := FIND(u, components);
                     vcomp := FIND(v, components);
                     if ucomp <> vcomp then begin
                        { e connects two different components }
                        MERGE (ucomp, vcomp, components);
                        ncomp := ncomp - 1;
                        INSERT(e, T)
                     end
                  end
                end; { Kruskal }


                                                Fig. 7.10. Kruskal's algorithm.


         Depth-First Search
         Recall from Section 6.5 the algorithm dfs for searching a directed graph. The same
         algorithm can be used to search undirected graphs, since the undirected edge (v, w)
         may be thought of as the pair of directed edges v → w and w → v.

              In fact, the depth-first spanning forests constructed for undirected graphs are even
         simpler than for digraphs. We should first note that each tree in the forest is one
         connected component of the graph, so if a graph is connected, it has only one tree in
         its depth-first spanning forest. Second, for digraphs we identified four kinds of arcs:
         tree, forward, back, and cross. For undirected graphs there are only two kinds: tree
         edges and back edges.

              Because there is no distinction between forward edges and backward edges for
         undirected graphs, we elect to refer to them all as back edges. In an undirected graph,
         there can be no cross edges, that is, edges (v, w) where v is neither an ancestor nor
         descendant of w in the spanning tree. Suppose there were. Then let v be a vertex that
         is reached before w in the search. The call to dfs(v) cannot end until w has been
         searched, so w is entered into the tree as some descendant of v. Similarly, if dfs(w) is
         called before dfs(v), then v becomes a descendant of w.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (10 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




             As a result, during a depth-first search of an undirected graph G, all edges
         become either

               1. tree edges, those edges (v, w) such that dfs(v) directly calls dfs(w) or vice
                  versa, or
               2. back edges, those edges (v, w) such that neither dfs(v) nor dfs(w) called the
                  other directly, but one called the other indirectly (i.e., dfs(w) calls dfs (x),
                  which calls dfs (v), so w is an ancestor of v).

         Example 7.6. Consider the connected graph G in Fig. 7.11(a). A depth-first spanning
         tree T resulting from a depth-first search of G is shown in Fig. 7.11(b). We assume
         the search began at vertex a, and we have adopted the convention of showing tree
         edges solid and back edges dashed. The tree has been drawn with the root on the top
         and the children of each vertex have been drawn in the left-to-right order in which
         they were first visited in the procedure of dfs.

              To follow a few steps of the search, the procedure dfs(a) calls dfs(b) and adds
         edge (a, b) to T since b is not yet visited. At b, dfs calls dfs(d) and adds edge (b, d) to
         T. At d, dfs calls dfs(e) and adds edge (d, e) to T. At e, vertices a, b, and d are marked
         visited so dfs(e) returns without adding any edges to T. At d, dfs now sees that
         vertices a and b are marked visited so dfs(d) returns without adding any more edges to
         T. At b, dfs now sees that the remaining adjacent vertices a and e are marked visited,
         so dfs(b) returns. The search then continues to c, f, and g.




                                       Fig. 7.11. A graph and its depth-first search.


         Breadth-First Search
         Another systematic way of visiting the vertices is called breadth-first search. The
         approach is called "breadth-first" because from each vertex v that we visit we search
         as broadly as possible by next visiting all the vertices adjacent to v. We can also apply
         this strategy of search to directed graphs.

              As for depth-first search, we can build a spanning forest when we perform a
         breadth-first search. In this case, we consider edge (x, y) a tree edge if vertex y is first
         visited from vertex x in the inner loop of the search procedure bfs of Fig. 7.12.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (11 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




              It turns out that for the breadth-first search of an undirected graph, every edge
         that is not a tree edge is a cross edge, that is, it connects two vertices neither of which
         is an ancestor of the other.

              The breadth-first search algorithm given in Fig. 7.12 inserts the tree edges into a
         set T, which we assume is initially empty. Every entry in the array mark is assumed to
         be initialized to the value unvisited; Figure 7.12 works on one connected component.
         If the graph is not connected, bfs must be called on a vertex of each component. Note
         that in a breadth-first search we must mark a vertex visited before enqueuing it, to
         avoid placing it on the queue more than once.

         Example 7.7. The breadth-first spanning tree for the graph G in Fig. 7.11(a) is shown
         in Fig. 7.13. We assume the search began at vertex a. As before, we have shown tree
         edges solid and other edges dashed. We have also drawn the tree with the root at the
         top and the children in the left-to-right order in which they were first visited.

               The time complexity of breadth-first search is the same as that of depth-


            procedure bfs ( v );
              { bfs visits all vertices connected to v using breadth-first search }
              var
                Q: QUEUE of vertex;
                x, y: vertex;
              begin
                mark[v] := visited;
                 ENQUEUE(v, Q);
                 while not EMPTY(Q) do begin
                   x := FRONT(Q);
                   DEQUEUE(Q);
                   for each vertex y adjacent to x do
                     if mark[y] = unvisited then begin
                         mark[y] := visited;
                         ENQUEUE(y, Q);
                        INSERT((x, y), T)
                     end
                 end
              end; { bfs }


                                                Fig. 7.12. Breadth-first search.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (12 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




                                            Fig. 7.13. Breadth-first search of G.

         first search. Each vertex visited is placed in the queue once, so the body of the while
         loop is executed once for each vertex. Each edge (x, y) is examined twice, once from
         x and once from y. Thus, if a graph has n vertices and e edges, the running time of bfs
         is O(max(n, e)) if we use an adjacency list representation for the edges. Since e ≥ n is
         typical, we shall usually refer to the running time of breadth-first search as O(e), just
         as we did for depth-first search.

              Depth-first search and breadth-first search can be used as frameworks around
         which to design efficient graph algorithms. For example, either method can be used to
         find the connected components of a graph, since the connected components are the
         trees of either spanning forest.

              We can test for cycles using breadth-first search in O(n) time, where n is the
         number of vertices, independent of the number of edges. As we discussed in Section
         7.1, any graph with n vertices and n or more edges must have a cycle. However, a
         graph could have n-1 or fewer edges and still have a cycle, if it had two or more
         connected components. One sure way to find the cycles is to build a breadth-first
         spanning forest. Then, every cross edge (v, w) must complete a simple cycle with the
         tree edges leading to v and w from their closest common ancestor, as shown in Fig.
         7.14.




                                    Fig. 7.14 A cycle found by breadth-first search.


         7.4 Articulation Points and Biconnected
         Components
         An articulation point of a graph is a vertex v such that when we remove v and all
         edges incident upon v, we break a connected component of the graph into two or
         more pieces. For example, the articulation points of Fig. 7.11(a) are a and c. If we
         delete a, the graph, which is one connected component, is divided into two triangles:



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (13 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




         {b, d, e} and {c, f, g}. If we delete c, we divide the graph into {a, b, d, e} and {f, g}.
         However, if we delete any one of the other vertices from the graph of Fig. 7.11(a), we
         do not split the connected component. A connected graph with no articulation points
         is said to be biconnected. Depth-first search is particularly useful in finding the
         biconnected components of a graph.

              The problem of finding articulation points is the simplest of many important
         problems concerning the connectivity of graphs. As an example of applications of
         connectivity algorithms, we may represent a communication network as a graph in
         which the vertices are sites to be kept in communication with one another. A graph
         has connectivity k if the deletion of any k-1 vertices fails to disconnect the graph. For
         example, a graph has connectivity two or more if and only if it has no articulation
         points, that is, if and only if it is biconnected. The higher the connectivity of a graph,
         the more likely the graph is to survive the failure of some of its vertices, whether by
         failure of the processing units at the vertices or external attack.

              We shall here give a simple depth-first search algorithm to find all the
         articulation points of a connected graph, and thereby test by their absence whether the
         graph is biconnected.

               1. Perform a depth-first search of the graph, computing dfnumber [v] for each
                  vertex v as discussed in Section 6.5. In essence, dfnumber orders the vertices
                  as in a preorder traversal of the depth-first spanning tree.

               2. For each vertex v, compute low [v], which is the smallest dfnumber of v or of
                  any vertex w reachable from v by following down zero or more tree edges to a
                  descendant x of v (x may be v) and then following a back edge (x, w). We
                  compute low [v] for all vertices v by visiting the vertices in a postorder
                  traversal. When we process v, we have computed low [y] for every child y of v.
                  We take low [v] to be the minimum of

                                   a. dfnumber [v],

                                   b. dfnumber [z] for any vertex z for which there is a back
                                      edge (v, z) and

                                   c. low [y] for any child y of v.

         ●   Now we find the articulation points as follows.

                         a. The root is an articulation point if and only if it has two or more
                            children. Since there are no cross edges, deletion of the root
                            must disconnect the subtrees rooted at its children, as a



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (14 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




                            disconnects {b, d, e} from {c, f, g} in Fig. 7.11(b).
                         b. A vertex v other than the root is an articulation point if and only
                            if there is some child w of v such that low [w] ≥ dfnumber [v]. In
                            this case, v disconnects w and its descendants from the rest of
                            the graph. Conversely, if low [w] < dfnumber [v], then there
                            must be a way to get from w down the tree and back to a proper
                            ancestor of v (the vertex whose dfnumber is low [w]), and
                            therefore deletion of v does not disconnect w or its descendants
                            from the rest of the graph.

         Example 7.8. dfnumber and low are computed for the graph of Fig. 7.11(a) in Fig.
         7.15. As an example of the calculation of low, our postorder traversal visits e first. At
         e, there are back edges (e, a) and (e, b), so low [e] is set to min(dfnumber [e],
         dfnumber [a], dfnumber [b]) = 1. Then d is visited, and low [d] is set to the minimum
         of dfnumber [d], low [e], and dfnumber [a ]. The second of these arises because e is a
         child of d and the third because of the back edge (d, a).




                                        Fig. 7.15. Depth-first and low numberings.

             After computing low we consider each vertex. The root, a, is an articulation point
         because it has two children. Vertex c is an articulation point because it has a child f
         with low [f] ≥ dfnumber [c]. The other vertices are not articulation points.

              The time taken by the above algorithm on a graph of e edges and n ≤ e vertices is
         O(e). The reader should check that the time spent in each of the three phases can be
         attributed either to the vertex visited or to an edge emanating from that vertex, there
         being only a constant amount of time attributable to any vertex or edge in any pass.
         Thus, the total time is O(n+e), which is O(e) under the assumption n ≤ e.


         7.5 Graph Matching
         In this section we outline an algorithm to solve "matching problems" on graphs. A
         simple example of a matching problem occurs when we have a set of teachers to
         assign to a set of courses. Each teacher is qualified to teach certain courses but not
         others. We wish to assign a course to a qualified teacher so that no two teachers are
         assigned the same course. With certain distributions of teachers and courses it is
         impossible to assign every teacher a course; in those situations we wish to assign as



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (15 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




         many teachers as possible.

              We can represent this situation by a graph as in Fig. 7.16 where the vertices are
         divided into two sets V1 and V2, such that vertices in the set V1 represent teachers and
         vertices in the set V2 courses. That teacher v is qualified to teach course w is
         represented by an edge (v, w). A graph such as this whose vertices can be divided into
         two disjoint groups with each edge having one end in each group is called bipartite.
         Assigning a teacher a course is equivalent to selecting an edge between a teacher
         vertex and a course vertex.




                                                  Fig. 7.16. A bipartite graph.

             The matching problem can be formulated in general terms as follows. Given a
         graph G =(V, E), a subset of the edges in E with no two edges incident upon the same
         vertex in V is called a matching. The task of selecting a maximum subset of such
         edges is called the maximal matching problem. The heavy edges in Fig. 7.16 are an
         example of one maximal matching in that graph. A complete matching is a matching
         in which every vertex is an endpoint of some edge in the matching. Clearly, every
         complete matching is a maximal matching.

              There is a straightforward way to find maximal matchings. We can systematically
         generate all matchings and then pick one that has the largest number of edges. The
         difficulty with this method is that it has a running time that is an exponential function
         of the number of edges.

              There are more efficient algorithms for finding maximal matchings. These
         algorithms generally use a technique known as "augmenting paths." Let M be a
         matching in a graph G. A vertex v is matched if it is the endpoint of an edge in M. A
         path connecting two unmatched vertices in which alternate edges in the path are in M
         is called an augmenting path relative to M. Observe that an augmenting path must be
         of odd length, and must begin and end with edges not in M. Also observe that given
         an augmenting path P we can always find a bigger matching by removing from M
         those edges that are in P, and then adding to M the edges of P that were initially not
         in M. This new matching is M ⊕ P where ⊕ denotes "exclusive or" on sets. That is,
         the new matching consists of those edges that are in M or P, but not in both.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (16 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




         Example 7.9. Figure 7.17(a) shows a graph and a matching M consisting of the heavy
         edges (1, 6), (3, 7), and (4, 8). The path 2, 6, 1, 8, 4, 9 in Fig. 7.17(b) is an
         augmenting path relative to M. Figure 7.18 shows the matching (l, 8), (2, 6), (3, 7), (4,
         9) obtained by removing from M those edges that are in the path, and then adding to
         M the other edges in the path.




                                     Fig. 7.17. A matching and an augmenting path.

             The key observation is that M is a maximal matching if and only if there is no
         augmenting path relative to M. This observation is the basis of our maximal matching
         algorithm.

              Suppose M and N are matchings with M < N. (M denotes the number of
         edges in M.) To see that M ⊕ N contains an augmenting path relative to M consider
         the graph G' = (V, M ⊕ N). Since M and N are both matchings, each vertex of V is an
         endpoint of at most one edge from M and an endpoint of at most one edge from N.
         Thus each connected component of G' forms a simple path (possibly a cycle) with
         edges alternating between M and N. Each path that is not a cycle is either an
         augmenting path relative to M or an augmenting path relative to N depending on
         whether it has more edges from N or




                                                Fig. 7.18. The larger matching.

         from M. Each cycle has an equal number of edges from M and N. Since M < N,
         M ⊕ N has more edges from N than M, and hence has at least one augmenting path
         relative to M.

              We can now outline our procedure to find a maximal matching M for a graph G =
         (V, E).




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (17 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




               1. Start with M = Ø.
               2. Find an augmenting path P relative to M and replace M by M ⊕ P.
               3. Repeat step (2) until no further augmenting paths exist, at which point M is a
                  maximal matching.

         It remains only to show how to find an augmenting path relative to a matching M. We
         shall do this for the simpler case where G is a bipartite graph with vertices partitioned
         into sets V1 and V2. We shall build an augmenting path graph for G for levels i = 0, 1,
         2, . . . using a process similar to breadth-first search. Level 0 consists of all
         unmatched vertices from V1. At odd level i, we add new vertices that are adjacent to a
         vertex at level i-1, by a non-matching edge, and we also add that edge. At even level
         i, we add new vertices that are adjacent to a vertex at level i-1 because of an edge in
         the matching M, together with that edge.

              We continue building the augmenting path graph level-by-level until an
         unmatched vertex is added at an odd level, or until no more vertices can be added. If
         there is an augmenting path relative to M, an unmatched vertex v will eventually be
         added at an odd level. The path from v to any vertex at level 0 is an augmenting path
         relative to M.

         Example 7.10. Figure 7.19 illustrates the augmenting path graph for the graph in Fig.
         7.17(a) relative to the matching in Fig. 7.18, in which we have chosen vertex 5 as the
         unmatched vertex at level 0. At level 1 we add the non-matching edge (5, 6). At level
         2 we add the matching edge (6, 2). At level 3 we can add either of the non-matching
         edges (2, 9) or (2, 10). Since both vertices 9 and 10 are currently unmatched, we can
         terminate the construction of the augmenting path graph after the addition of either
         one of these vertices. Both paths 9, 2, 6, 5 and 10, 2, 6, 5 are augmenting paths
         relative to the matching in Fig. 7.18.




                                             Fig. 7.19. Augmenting path graph.

              Suppose G has n vertices and e edges. Constructing the augmenting path graphs
         for a given matching takes O(e) time if we use an adjacency list representation for
         edges. Thus, to find each new augmenting path takes O(e) time. To find a maximal
         matching, we construct at most n/2 augmenting paths, since each enlarges the current
         matching by at least one edge. Therefore, a maximal matching may be found in O(ne)
         time for a bipartite graph G.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (18 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




         Exercises

                     Describe an algorithm to insert and delete edges in the adjacency list
                 7.1 representation for an undirected graph. Remember that an edge (i, j)
                     appears on the adjacency list for both vertex i and vertex j.

                     Modify the adjacency list representation for an undirected graph so that
                     the first edge on the adjacency list for a vertex can be deleted in constant
                 7.2 time. Write an algorithm to delete the first edge at a vertex using your
                     new representation. Hint. How do you arrange that the two cells
                     representing edge (i, j) can be found quickly from one another?

                         Consider the graph of Fig. 7.20.

                                         a. Find a minimum-cost spanning tree by Prim's
                                            algorithm.

                                        b. Find a minimum-cost spanning tree by Kruskal's
                                           algorithm.

                                         c. Find a depth-first spanning tree starting at a and at
                 7.3                        d.

                                        d. Find a breadth-first spanning tree starting at a and
                                           at d.




                                                               Fig. 7.20. A graph.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (19 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




                         Let T be a depth-first spanning tree and B be the back edges for a
                         connected undirected graph G = (V, E).

                                         a. Show that when each back edge from B is added to
                                            T a unique cycle results. Call such a cycle a basic
                                            cycle.

                 7.4                    b. The linear combination of cycles C1, C2, . . . , Cn is
                                           C1 ⊕ C2 ⊕ . . . ⊕ Cn. Prove that the linear
                                           combination of two distinct nondisjoint cycles is a
                                           cycle.

                                         c. Show that every cycle in G can be expressed as a
                                            linear combination of basic cycles.


                    Let G = (V, E) be a graph. Let R be a relation on V such that u R v if and
               *7.5 only if u and v lie on a common (not necessarily simple) cycle. Prove
                    that R is an equivalence relation on V.

                         Implement both Prim's algorithm and Kruskal's algorithm. Compare the
                 7.6
                         running times of your programs on a set of "random" graphs.

                 7.7 Write a program to find all the connected components of a graph.

                         Write an O(n) program to determine whether a graph of n vertices has a
                 7.8
                         cycle.

                         Write a program to enumerate all simple cycles of a graph. How many
                 7.9
                         such cycles can there be? What is the time complexity of your program?

                         Show that all edges in a breadth-first search are either tree edges or cross
               7.10
                         edges.

                         Implement the algorithm for finding articulation points discussed in
               7.11
                         Section 7.4.

                    Let G = (V, E) be a complete graph, that is, a graph in which there is an
                    edge between every pair of distinct vertices. Let G' = (V, E') be a
              *7.12 directed graph in which E' is E with each edge given an arbitrary
                    orientation. Show that G' has a directed path that includes every vertex
                    exactly once.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (20 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:36]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




            **7.13 Show that an n-vertex complete graph has nn-2 spanning trees.

               7.14 Find all maximal matchings for the graph of Fig. 7.16.

               7.15 Write a program to find a maximal matching for a bipartite graph.

                         Let M be a matching and let m be the number of edges in a maximal
                         matching.

                                         a. Prove there exists an augmenting path relative to M
                                            of length at most 2(M/(m - M)) + 1.
               7.16
                                        b. Prove that if P is a shortest augmenting path
                                           relative to M and if P' is an augmenting path
                                           relative to M ⊕ P, then P' ≥ P + P ∩ P'.


                    Prove that a graph is bipartite if and only if it has no odd length cycles.
              *7.17 Give an example of a non-bipartite graph for which the augmenting path
                    graph technique of Section 7.5 no longer works.

                    Let M and N be matchings in a bipartite graph with M < N. Prove
               7.18 that M ⊕ N has at least N - M vertex disjoint augmenting paths
                    relative to M.


         Bibliographic Notes
         Methods for constructing minimal spanning trees have been studied since at least
         Boruvka [1926]. The two algorithms given in this chapter are based on Kruskal
         [1956] and Prim [1957]. Johnson [1975] shows how k-ary partially ordered trees can
         be used to implement Prim's algorithm. Cheriton and Tarjan [1976] and Yao [1975]
         present O(e 1og log n) spanning tree algorithms. Tarjan [1981] provides a
         comprehensive survey and history of spanning tree algorithms.

             Hopcroft and Tarjan [1973] and Tarjan [1972] popularized the use of depth-first
         search in graph algorithms. The biconnected components algorithm is from there.

             Graph matching was studied by Hall [1948] and augmenting paths by Berge
         [1957] and by Edmonds [1965]. Hopcroft and Karp [1973] give an O(n2.5) algorithm
         for maximal matching in bipartite graphs, and Micali and Vazirani [1980] give an
                             algorithm for maximal matching in general graphs. Papadimitriou and



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (21 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:37]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 7: Undirected Graphs




         Steiglitz [1982] contains a good discussion of general matching.

         † Unless otherwise stated, we shall assume an edge is always a pair of distinct
         vertices.

         † Note that MERGE and FIND are defined slightly differently from Section 5.5, since
         C is a parameter telling where A and B can be found.

         ‡We can initialize a partially ordered tree of e elements in O(e) time if we do it all at
         once. We discuss this technique in Section 8.4, and we should probably use it here,
         since if many fewer than e edges are examined before the minimum-cost spanning
         tree is found, we may save significant time.

                                            Table of Contents           Go to Chapter 8




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1207.htm (22 of 22) [1.7.2001 19:15:37]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_1.gif [1.7.2001 19:15:54]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_2.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_2.gif [1.7.2001 19:16:11]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_3.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_3.gif [1.7.2001 19:16:26]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_4.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_4.gif [1.7.2001 19:16:34]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_5.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_5.gif [1.7.2001 19:16:51]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_9.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_9.gif [1.7.2001 19:17:08]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_10.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_10.gif [1.7.2001 19:17:21]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_11.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_11.gif [1.7.2001 19:17:35]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_12.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_12.gif [1.7.2001 19:17:50]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_13.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_13.gif [1.7.2001 19:18:00]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_14.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_14.gif [1.7.2001 19:18:06]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:18:18]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_19.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_19.gif [1.7.2001 19:18:30]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_20.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_20.gif [1.7.2001 19:18:41]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_22.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_22.gif [1.7.2001 19:18:49]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_23.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_23.gif [1.7.2001 19:19:01]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_25.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_25.gif [1.7.2001 19:19:11]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_26.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_26.gif [1.7.2001 19:19:18]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_27.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_27.gif [1.7.2001 19:19:24]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_28.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_28.gif [1.7.2001 19:19:33]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_29.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_29.gif [1.7.2001 19:19:45]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_30.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_30.gif [1.7.2001 19:19:49]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_31.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_31.gif [1.7.2001 19:20:02]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_32.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_32.gif [1.7.2001 19:20:17]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_33.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_33.gif [1.7.2001 19:20:32]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_34.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_34.gif [1.7.2001 19:20:38]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_35.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_35.gif [1.7.2001 19:20:44]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_36.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_36.gif [1.7.2001 19:20:55]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_37.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_37.gif [1.7.2001 19:21:03]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_38.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig6_38.gif [1.7.2001 19:21:14]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          Sorting
          The process of sorting, or ordering, a list of objects according to some linear order
          such as ≤ for numbers is so fundamental, and is done so frequently, that a careful
          examination of the subject is warranted. We shall divide the subject into two parts --
          internal and external sorting. Internal sorting takes place in the main memory of a
          computer, where we can use the random access capability of the main memory to
          advantage in various ways. External sorting is necessary when the number of objects
          to be sorted is too large to fit in main memory. There, the bottleneck is usually the
          movement of data between main and secondary storage, and we must move data in
          large blocks to be efficient. The fact that physically contiguous data is most
          conveniently moved in one block constrains the kinds of external sorting algorithms
          we can use. External sorting will be covered in Chapter 11.


          8.1 The Internal Sorting Model
          In this chapter, we shall present the principal internal sorting algorithms. The
          simplest algorithms usually take O(n2) time to sort n objects and are only useful for
          sorting short lists. One of the most popular sorting algorithms is quicksort, which
          takes O(nlogn) time on average. Quicksort works well for most common
          applications, although, in the worst case, it can take O(n2) time. There are other
          methods, such as heapsort and mergesort, that take O(nlogn) time in the worst case,
          although their average case behavior may not be quite as good as that of quicksort.
          Mergesort, however, is well-suited for external sorting. We shall consider several
          other algorithms called "bin" or "bucket" sorts. These algorithms work only on
          special kinds of data, such as integers chosen from a limited range, but when
          applicable, they are remarkably fast, taking only O(n) time in the worst case.

             Throughout this chapter we assume that the objects to be sorted are records
          consisting of one or more fields. One of the fields, called the key, is of a type for
          which a linear-ordering relationship ≤ is defined. Integers, reals, and arrays of
          characters are common examples of such types, although we may generally use any
          key type for which a "less than" or "less than or equal to" relation is defined.

              The sorting problem is to arrange a sequence of records so that the values of their
          key fields form a nondecreasing sequence. That is, given records r1, r2, . . . ,rn, with
          key values k1, k2, . . . , kn, respectively, we must produce the same records in an order
          ri1, ri2, . . . , rin, such that ki1 ≤ ki2 ≤ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ≤ kin. The records all need not have distinct
          values, nor do we require that records with the same key value appear in any



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (1 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          particular order.

             We shall use several criteria to evaluate the running time of an internal sorting
          algorithm. The first and most common measure is the number of algorithm steps
          required to sort n records. Another common measure is the number of comparisons
          between keys that must be made to sort n records. This measure is often useful when
          a comparison between a pair of keys is a relatively expensive operation, as when
          keys are long strings of characters. If the size of records is large, we may also want to
          count the number of times a record must be moved. The application at hand usually
          makes the appropriate cost measure evident.


          8.2 Some Simple Sorting Schemes
          Perhaps the simplest sorting method one can devise is an algorithm called
          "bubblesort." The basic idea behind bubblesort is to imagine that the records to be
          sorted are kept in an array held vertically. The records with low key values are
          "light" and bubble up to the top. We make repeated passes over the array, from
          bottom to top. As we go, if two adjacent elements are out of order, that is, if the
          "lighter" one is below, we reverse them. The effect of this operation is that on the
          first pass the "lightest" record, that is, the record with the lowest key value, rises all
          the way to the top. On the second pass, the second lowest key rises to the second
          position, and so on. We need not, on pass two, try to bubble up to position one,
          because we know the lowest key already resides there. In general, pass i need not try
          to bubble up past position i. We sketch the algorithm in Fig. 8.1, assuming A is an
          array[1..n] of recordtype, and n is the number of records. We assume here, and
          throughout the chapter, that one field called key holds the key value for each record.


          (1)       for i := 1 to n-1 do
          (2)          for j := n downto i+1 do
          (3)              if A[j].key < A[j-1].key
          then
          (4)                    swap(A[j], A[j-1])

                                             Fig. 8.1. The bubblesort algorithm.

          The procedure swap is used in many sorting algorithms and is defined in Fig. 8.2.

          Example 8.1. Figure 8.3 shows a list of famous volcanoes, and a year in which each
          erupted.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (2 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




             For this example we shall use the following type definitions in our sorting
          programs:


              procedure swap ( var x, y: recordtype )
                { swap exchanges the values of x and y }
                var
                   temp: recordtype;
                begin
                   temp := x;
                   x := y;
                   y := temp
                end; { swap }

                                                 Fig. 8.2. The procedure swap.




                                                     Fig. 8.3. Famous volcanoes.


              type
                keytype = array[1..10] of char;
                recordtype = record
                   key: keytype; { the volcano name }
                   year: integer
                end;

          The bubblesort algorithm of Fig. 8.1 applied to the list of Fig. 8.3 sorts the list in
          alphabetical order of names, if the relation ≤ on objects of this key type is the
          ordinary lexicographic order. In Fig. 8.4, we see the five passes made by the
          algorithm when n = 6. The lines indicate the point above which the names are known
          to be the smallest in the list and in the correct order. However, after i = 5, when all
          but the last record is in its place, the last must also be in its correct place, and the
          algorithm stops.

             At the start of the first pass, St. Helens bubbles past Vesuvius, but not past
          Agung. On the remainder of that pass, Agung bubbles all the way up to the top. In
          the second pass, Etna bubbles as far as it can go, to position 2. In the third pass,



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (3 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          Krakatoa bubbles past Pelee, and the list is now in lexicographically sorted order
          although according to the algorithm of Fig. 8.1, two additional passes are made.




                                              Fig. 8.4. The passes of bubblesort.


          Insertion Sorting
          The second sorting method we shall consider is called "insertion sort," because on
          the ith pass we "insert" the ith element A[i] into its rightful place among A[1], A[2], . .
          . , A[i-1], which were previously placed in sorted order. After doing this insertion, the
          records occupying A[1], . . . , A[i] are in sorted order. That is, we execute


              for i := 2 to n do
                 move A[i] forward to the position j ≤
          i such that
                     A[i] < A[k] for j ≤
          k < i, and
                     either A[i] ≥ A[j-1] or
          j=1

          To make the process of moving A[i] easier, it helps to introduce an element A[0],
          whose key has a value smaller than that of any key among A[1], . . . ,A[n]. We shall
          postulate the existence of a constant -∞ of type keytype that is smaller than the key of
          any record that could appear in practice. If no constant -∞ can be used safely, we
          must, when deciding whether to push A[i] up before position j, check first whether j
          = 1, and if not, compare A[i] (which is now in position j) with A[j-1]. The complete
          program is shown in Fig. 8.5.


          (1)      A[0].key := -∞;
          (2)      for i := 2 to n do begin
          (3)         j := i;
          (4)         while A[j] < A[j-1] do begin
          (5)             swap(A[j], A[j-1]);
          (6)             j := j-1
                     end
                  end



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (4 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




                                                     Fig. 8.5. Insertion sort.

          Example 8.2. We show in Fig. 8.6 the initial list from Fig. 8.3, and the result of the
          passes of insertion sort for i = 2, 3, . . . , 6. After each pass, the elements above the
          line are guaranteed to be sorted relative to each other, although their order bears no
          relation to the records below the line, which will be inserted later.




                                            Fig. 8.6. The passes of insertion sort.


          Selection Sort
          The idea behind "selection sorting" is also elementary. In the ith pass, we select the
          record with the lowest key, among A[i], . . . , A[n], and we swap it with A[i]. As a
          result, after i passes, the i lowest records will occupy A[1] , . . . , A[i], in sorted order.
          That is, selection sort can be described by


              for i := 1 to n-1 do
                 select the smallest among A[i], . . . , A[n] and
                     swap it with A[i];

          A more complete program is shown in Fig. 8.7.

          Example 8.3. The passes of selection sort on the list of Fig. 8.3 are shown in Fig.
          8.8. For example, on pass 1, the ultimate value of lowindex is 4, the position of
          Agung, which is swapped with Pelee in A[1].

              The lines in Fig. 8.8 indicate the point above which elements known to be
          smallest appear in sorted order. After n - 1 passes, record A[n], Vesuvius in Fig. 8.8,
          is also in its rightful place, since it is the element known not to be among the n - 1
          smallest.


          Time Complexity of the Methods
          Bubblesort, insertion sort, and selection sort each take O(n2) time, and will take
          Ω(n2) time on some, in fact, on most input sequences of n elements. Consider



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (5 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          bubblesort in Fig. 8.1. No matter what recordtype is, swap takes a constant time.
          Thus lines (3) and (4) of Fig. 8.1 take at most c1 time units for some constant c1.
          Hence for a fixed value of i, the loop of lines (2- 4)


              var
                lowkey: keytype; { the currently smallest key found
                   on a pass through A[i], . . . , A[n] }
                lowindex : integer; { the position of lowkey }
              begin
          (1)    for i := 1 to n-1 do begin
                    { select the lowest among A[i], . . . , A[n] and swap it with
          A[i] }
          (2)        lowindex := i;
          (3)        lowkey := A[i].key;
          (4)        for j := i + 1 to n do
                       { compare each key with current lowkey }
          (5)           if A[j].key < lowkey then begin
          (6)                   lowkey := A[j].key;
          (7)                   lowindex := j
                       end;
          (8)       swap(A[i], A[lowindex])
                end
              end;

                                                     Fig. 8.7. Selection sort.




                                               Fig. 8.8. Passes of selection sort.

          takes at most c2(n-i) steps, for some constant c2; the latter constant is somewhat
          larger than c1 to account for decrementation and testing of j. Consequently, the entire
          program takes at most




          steps, where the term c3n accounts for incrementating and testing i. As the latter



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (6 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          formula does not exceed (c2/2+c3)n2, for n ≥ 1, we see that the time complexity of
          bubblesort is O(n2). The algorithm requires Ω(n2) steps, since even if no swaps are
          ever needed (i.e., the input happens to be already sorted), the test of line (3) is
          executed n(n - 1)/2 times.

             Next consider the insertion sort of Fig. 8.5. The while-loop of lines (4-6) of Fig.
          8.5 cannot take more than O(i) steps, since j is initialized to i at line (3), and
          decreases each time around the loop. The loop terminates by the time j = 1, since
          A[0] is -∞, which forces the test of line (4) to be false when j = 1. We may conclude

          that the for-loop of lines (2-6) takes at most                          steps for some constant c. This
          sum is O(n2).

             The reader may check that if the array is initially sorted in reverse order, then we
          actually go around the while-loop of lines (4-6) i-1 times, so line (4) is executed
                    times. Therefore, insertion sort requires Ω(n2) time in the worst case. It can
          be shown that this smaller bound holds in the average case as well.

              Finally, consider selection sort in Fig. 8.7. We may check that the inner for-loop
          of lines (4-7) takes O(n-i) time, since j ranges from i+1 to n. Thus the total time taken

          by the algorithm is c          , for some constant c. This sum, which is cn(n - 1)/2, is
          seen easily to be O(n2). Conversely, one can show that line (5), at least, is executed
                    times regardless of the initial array A, so selection sort takes Ω(n2) time in
          the worst case and the average case as well.


          Counting Swaps
          If the size of records is large, the procedure swap, which is the only place in the three
          algorithms where records are copied, will take far more time than any of the other
          steps, such as comparison of keys and calculations on array indices. Thus, while all
          three algorithms take time proportional to n2, we might be able to compare them in
          more detail if we count the uses of swap.

              To begin, bubblesort executes the swap step of line (4) of Fig. 8.1 at most




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (7 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          times, or about n2/2 times. But since the execution of line (4) depends on the
          outcome of the test of line (3), we might expect that the actual number of swaps will
          be considerably less than n2/2.

               In fact, bubblesort swaps exactly half the time on the average, so the expected
          number of swaps if all initial sequences are equally likely is about n2/4. To see this,
          consider two initial lists of keys that are the reverse of one another, say L1 = k1, k2 , .
          . . , kn and L2 = kn, kn - 1, . . . , k1. A swap is the only way ki and kj can cross each
          other if they are initially out of order. But ki and kj are out of order in exactly one of
          L1 and L2. Thus the total number of swaps executed when bubblesort is applied to L1

          and L2 is equal to the number of pairs of elements, that is, (                            ) or n(n - 1)/2.
          Therefore the average number of swaps for L1 and L2 is n(n - 1)/4 or about n2/4.
          Since all possible orderings can be paired with their reversals, as L1 and L2 were, we
          see that the average number of swaps over all orderings will likewise be about n2/4.

              The number of swaps made by insertion sort on the average is exactly what it is
          for bubblesort. The same argument applies; each pair of elements gets swapped
          either in a list L or its reverse, but never in both.

             However, in the case that swap is an expensive operation we can easily see that
          selection sort is superior to either bubblesort or insertion sort. Line (8) in Fig. 8.7 is
          outside the inner loop of the selection sort algorithm, so it is executed exactly n - 1
          times on any array of length n. Since line (8) has the only call to swap in selection
          sort, we see that the rate of growth in the number of swaps by selection sort, which is
          O(n), is less than the growth rates of the number of swaps by the other two
          algorithms, which is O(n2). Intuitively, unlike bubblesort or insertion sort, selection
          sort allows elements to "leap" over large numbers of other elements without being
          swapped with each of them individually.

             A useful strategy to use when records are long and swaps are expensive is to
          maintain an array of pointers to the records, using whatever sorting algorithm one
          chooses. One can then swap pointers rather than records. Once the pointers to the
          records have been arranged into the proper order, the records themselves can be
          arranged into the final sorted order in O(n) time.


          Limitations of the Simple Algorithms
          We should not forget that each of the algorithms mentioned in this section has an
          O(n2) running time, in both the worst case and average case. Thus, for large n, none


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (8 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          of these algorithms compares favorably with the O(nlogn) algorithms to be discussed
          in the next sections. The value of n at which these more complex O(nlogn)
          algorithms become better than the simple O(n2) algorithms depends on a variety of
          factors such as the quality of the object code generated by the compiler, the machine
          on which the programs are run, and the size of the records we must swap.
          Experimentation with a time profiler is a good way to determine the cutover point. A
          reasonable rule of thumb is that unless n is at least around one hundred, it is probably
          a waste of time to implement an algorithm more complicated than the simple ones
          discussed in this section. Shellsort, a generalization of bubblesort, is a simple, easy-
          to-implement O(n1.5) sorting algorithm that is reasonably efficient for modest values
          of n. Shellsort is presented in Exercise 8.3.


          8.3 Quicksort
          The first O(nlogn) algorithm† we shall discuss, and probably the most efficient for
          internal sorting, has been given the name "quicksort." The essence of quicksort is to
          sort an array A[1], . . . , A[n] by picking some key value v in the array as a pivot
          element around which to rearrange the elements in the array. We hope the pivot is
          near the median key value in the array, so that it is preceded by about half the keys
          and followed by about half. We permute the elements in the array so that for some j,
          all the records with keys less than v appear in A[1] , . . . , A[ j], and all those with
          keys v or greater appear in A[j+ 1], . . . , A[n]. We then apply quicksort recursively to
          A[1], . . . , A[j] and to A[j + 1] , . . . , A[n] to sort both these groups of elements. Since
          all keys in the first group precede all keys in the second group, the entire array will
          thus be sorted.

          Example 8.4. In Fig. 8.9 we display the recursive steps that quicksort might take to
          sort the sequence of integers 3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9, 2, 6, 5, 3. In each case, we have chosen
          to take as our value v the larger of the two leftmost distinct values. The recursion
          stops when we discover that the portion of the array we have to sort consists of
          identical keys. We have shown each level as consisting of two steps, one before
          partitioning each subarray, and the second after. The rearrangement of records that
          takes place during partitioning will be explained shortly.

              Let us now begin the design of a recursive procedure quicksort(i, j) that operates
          on an array A with elements A[1] , . . . , A[n], defined externally to the procedure.
          quicksort(i, j) sorts A[i] through A[j], in place. A preliminary sketch of the procedure
          is shown in Fig. 8.10. Note that if A[i], . . . , A[ j] all have the same key, the
          procedure does nothing to A.

              We begin by developing a function findpivot that implements the test of line (1) of



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (9 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          Fig. 8.10, determining whether the keys of A[i], . . . , A[j] are all the same. If
          findpivot never finds two different keys, it returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the index
          of the larger of the first two different keys. This larger key becomes the pivot
          element. The function findpivot is written in Fig. 8.11.

              Next, we implement line (3) of Fig. 8.10, where we face the problem of permuting
          A[i], . . . , A[j], in place‡, so that all the keys smaller than the pivot value appear to
          the left of the others. To do this task, we introduce two cursors, l and r, initially at the
          left and right ends of the portion of A being sorted, respectively. At all times, the
          elements to the left of l, that is, A[i], . . . , A[l - 1] will have keys less than the pivot.
          Elements to the right of r, that is, A[r+1], . . . , A[j], will have keys equal to or greater
          than the pivot, and elements in the middle will be mixed, as suggested in Fig. 8.12.

              Initially, i = l and j = r so the above statement holds since nothing is to the left of l
          or to the right of r. We repeatedly do the following steps, which move l right and r
          left, until they finally cross, whereupon A[i], . . . , A[l - 1] will contain all the keys
          less than the pivot and A[r+1], . . . , A[j] all the keys equal to or greater than the
          pivot.

               1. Scan. Move l right over any records with keys less than the pivot. Move r left
                  over any keys greater than or equal to the pivot. Note that our




                                                 Fig. 8.9. The operation of quicksort.

                    selection of the pivot by findpivot guarantees that there is at least one key less
                    than the pivot and at least one not less than the pivot, so l and r will surely
                    come to rest before moving outside the range i to j.

               2. Test. If l > r (which in practice means l = r+1), then we have successfully
                  partitioned A[i], . . . , A[j], and we are done.

               3. Switch. If l < r (note we cannot come to rest during the scan with l = r,
                  because one or the other of these will move past any given key), then


                    (1)   if A[i] through A[j] contains at least two distinct keys
                    then begin



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (10 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




                    (2)          let v be the larger of the first two distinct keys found;
                    (3)           permute A[i], . . . ,A[j] so that for some k between
                                   i + 1 and j, A[i], . . . ,A[k - 1 ] all have keys less
                    than
                                   v and A[k], . . . ,A[j] all have keys ≥ v;
                    (4)           quicksort(i, k - 1 );
                    (5)           quicksort(k, j)
                            end

                                                       Fig. 8.10. Sketch of quicksort.


                    function findpivot ( i, j: integer ) :integer;
                      { returns 0 if A[i], . . . ,A[j] have identical keys, otherwise
                      returns the index of the larger of the leftmost two different keys }
                      var
                        firstkey: keytype; { value of first key found, i.e., A[i].key }
                        k: integer; { runs left to right looking for a different key }
                      begin
                        firstkey := A[i].key;
                        for k := i + 1 to j do {scan for different key}
                          if A[k].key > firstkey then { select larger key }
                             return (k)
                          else if A[k].key < firstkey then
                             return (i);
                          return (0) { different keys were never found }
                      end; { findpivot }

                                                     Fig. 8.11. The procedure findpivot.




                                       Fig. 8.12. Situation during the permutation process.

                    swap A[l] with A[r]. After doing so, A[l] has a key less than the pivot and A[r]
                    has a key at least equal to the pivot, so we know that in the next scan phase, l
                    will move at least one position right, over the old A[r], and r will move at
                    least one position left.

             The above loop is awkward, since the test that terminates it is in the middle. To
          put it in the form of a repeat-loop, we move the switch phase to the beginning. The



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (11 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          effect is that initially, when i = l and j = r, we shall swap A[i] with A[j]. This could be
          right or wrong; it doesn't matter, as we assume no particular order for the keys
          among A[i], . . . , A[j] initially. The reader, however, should be aware of this "trick"
          and not be puzzled by it. The function partition, which performs the above
          operations and returns l, the point at which the upper half of the partitioned array
          begins, is shown in Fig. 8.13.


               function partition ( i, j: integer; pivot: keytype ): integer;
                { partitions A[i], . . . ,A[j] so keys < pivot are at the left
                and keys ≥ pivot are on the right. Returns the
          beginning of the
                group on the right. }
                 var
                   l, r: integer; { cursors as described above }
                 begin
          (1)         l := i;
          (2)         r := j;
                    repeat
          (3)            swap(A[l], A[r]);
                       { now the scan phase begins }
          (4)            while A[l].key < pivot do
          (5)              l := l + 1;
          (6)            while A[r].key > = pivot do
          (7)              r := r - 1
                    until
          (8)            l > r;
          (9)         return (l)
                 end; { partition }

                                             Fig. 8.13. The procedure partition.

             We are now ready to elaborate the quicksort sketch of Fig. 8.10. The final
          program is shown in Fig. 8.14. To sort an array A of type array[1..n] of recordtype
          we simply call quicksort(1, n).


          The Running Time of Quicksort
          We shall show that quicksort takes O(nlogn) time on the average to sort n elements,
          and O(n2) time in the worst case. The first step in substantiating both claims is to
          prove that partition takes time proportional to the number of elements that it is called
          upon to separate, that is, O(j - i + 1) time.


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (12 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




              procedure quicksort ( i, j: integer );
               { sort elements A[i], . . . ,A[j] of external array A }
               var
                  pivot: keytype; { the pivot value }
                  pivotindex: integer; { the index of an element of A where
                    key is the pivot }
                  k: integer; { beginning index for group of elements ≥
          pivot }
               begin
          (1)      pivotindex := findpivot(i, j);
          (2)      if pivotindex <> 0 then begin { do nothing if all keys are equal }
          (3)            pivot := A[pivotindex].key;
          (4)            k := partition(i, j, pivot);
          (5)            quicksort(i, k - 1);
          (6)            quicksort(k, j)
                  end
               end; { quicksort }

                                             Fig. 8.14. The procedure quicksort.

             To see why that statement is true, we must use a trick that comes up frequently in
          analyzing algorithms; we must find certain "items" to which time may be "charged,"
          and then show how to charge each step of the algorithm so no item is charged more
          than some constant. Then the total time spent is no greater than this constant times
          the number of "items."

              In our case, the "items" are the elements from A[i] to A[j], and we charge to each
          element all the time spent by partition from the time l or r first points to that element
          to the time l or r leaves that element. First note that neither l nor r ever returns to an
          element. Because there is at least one element in the low group and one in the high
          group, and because partition stops as soon as l exceeds r, we know that each element
          will be charged at most once.

              We move off an element in the loops of lines (4) and (6) of Fig. 8.13, either by
          increasing l or decreasing r. How long could it be between times when we execute l :
          = l + 1 or r := r - 1? The worst that can happen is at the beginning. Lines (1) and (2)
          initialize l and r. Then we might go around the loop without doing anything to l or r.
          On second and subsequent passes, the swap at line (3) guarantees that the while-
          loops of lines (4) and (6) will be successful at least once each, so the worst that can
          be charged to an execution of l := l + 1 or r := r - 1 is the cost of line (1), line (2),



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (13 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          twice line (3), and the tests of lines (4), (6), (8), and (4) again. This is only a constant
          amount, independent of i or j, and subsequent executions of l := l + 1 or r := r - 1 are
          charged less -- at most one execution of lines (3) and (8) and once around the loops
          of lines (4) or (6).

              There are also the final two unsuccessful tests at lines (4), (6), and (8), that may
          not be charged to any "item," but these represent only a constant amount and may be
          charged to any item. After all charges have been made, we still have some constant c
          so that no item has been charged more than c time units. Since there are j - i + 1
          "items," that is, elements in the portion of the array to be sorted, the total time spent
          by partition(i, j, pivot) is O(j - i + 1).

              Now let us turn to the running time spent by quicksort(i, j). We can easily check
          that the time spent by the call to findpivot at line (1) of Fig. 8.14 is O(j - i + 1), and in
          most cases much smaller. The test of line (2) takes a constant amount of time, as does
          step (3) if executed. We have just argued that line (4), the call to partition, will take
          O(j - i + 1) time. Thus, exclusive of recursive calls it makes to quicksort, each
          individual call of quicksort takes time at most proportional to the number of elements
          it is called upon to sort.

             Put another way, the total time taken by quicksort is the sum over all elements of
          the number of times that element is part of the subarray on which a call to quicksort
          is made. Let us refer back to Fig. 8.9, where we see calls to quicksort organized into
          levels. Evidently, no element can be involved in two calls at the same level, so the
          time taken by quicksort can be expressed as the sum over all elements of the depth,
          or maximum level, at which that element is found. For example, the 1's in Fig. 8.9
          are of depth 3 and the 6 of depth 5.

             In the worst case, we could manage to select at each call to quicksort a worst
          possible pivot, say the largest of the key values in the subarray being sorted. Then we
          would divide the subarray into two smaller subarrays, one with a single element (the
          element with the pivot as key) and the other with everything else. That sequence of
          partitions leads to a tree like that of Fig. 8.15, where r1, r2 , . . . , rn is the sequence of
          records in order of increasing keys.




                              Fig. 8.15. A worst possible sequence of pivot selections.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (14 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




              The depth of ri is n - i + 1 for 2 ≤ i ≤ n, and the depth of r1 is n - 1. Thus the sum
          of the depths is




          which is Ω(n2). Thus in the worst case, quicksort takes time proportional to n2 to sort
          n elements.


          Average Case Analysis of Quicksort
          Let us, as always, interpret "average case" for a sorting algorithm to mean the
          average over all possible initial orderings, equal probability being attributed to each
          possible ordering. For simplicity, we shall assume no two elements have equal keys.
          In general, equalities among elements make our sorting task easier, not harder,
          anyway.

             A second assumption that makes our analysis of quicksort easier is that, when we
          call quicksort(i, j), then all orders for A [i], . . . , A [j] are equally likely. The
          justification is that prior to this call, no pivots with which A [i], . . . , A [j] were
          compared distinguished among them; that is, for each such pivot v, either all were
          less than v or all were equal to or greater than v. A careful examination of the
          quicksort program we developed shows that each pivot element is likely to wind up
          near the right end of the subarray of elements equal to or greater than this pivot, but
          for large subarrays, the fact that the minimum element (the previous pivot, that is) is
          likely to appear near the right end doesn't make a measurable difference.†

              Now, let T(n) be the average time taken by quicksort to sort n elements. Clearly
          T(1) is some constant c1, since on one element, quicksort makes no recursive calls to
          itself. When n > 1, since we assume all elements have unequal keys, we know
          quicksort will pick a pivot and split the subarray, taking c2n time to do this, for some
          constant c2, then call quicksort on the two subarrays. It would be nice if we could
          claim that the pivot was equally likely to be any of the first, second, . . . , nth element
          in the sorted order for the subarray being sorted. However, to guarantee ourselves
          that quicksort would find at least one key less than each pivot and at least one equal
          to or greater than the pivot (so each piece would be smaller than the whole, and
          therefore infinite loops would not be possible), we always picked the larger of the
          first two elements found. It turns out that this selection doesn't affect the distribution
          of sizes of the subarrays, but it does tend to make the left groups (those less than the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (15 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          pivot) larger then the right groups.

              Let us develop a formula for the probability that the left group has i of the n
          elements, on the assumption that all elements are unequal. For the left group to have i
          elements, the pivot must be the i + 1st among the n. The pivot, by our method of
          selection, could either have been in the first position, with one of the i smaller
          elements second, or it could have been second, with one of the i smaller ones first.
          The probability that any particular element, such as the i + 1st, appears first in a
          random order is 1/n. Given that it did appear first, the probability that the second
          element is one of the i smaller elements out of the n -1 remaining elements is i/(n -
          1). Thus the probability that the pivot appears in the first position and is number i + 1
          out of n in the proper order is i/n(n - 1). Similarly, the probability that the pivot
          appears in the second position and is number i + 1 out of n in the sorted order is i/n(n
          - 1), so the probability that the left group is of size i is 2i/n(n - 1), for 1 ≤ i < n.

              Now we can write a recurrence for T(n).




          Equation (8.1) says that the average time taken by quicksort is the time, c2n, spent
          outside of the recursive calls, plus the average time spent in recursive calls. The latter
          time is expressed in (8.1) as the sum, over all possible i, of the probability that the
          left group is of size i (and therefore the right group is of size n - i) times the cost of
          the two recursive calls: T(i) and T(n - i), respectively.

             Our first task is to transform (8.1) so that the sum is simplified, and in fact, so
          (8.1) takes on the form it would have had if we had picked a truly random pivot at
          each step. To make the transformation, observe that for any function f (i) whatsoever,
          by substituting i for n - i we may prove




          By replacing half the left side of (8.2) by the right side, we see




          Applying (8.3) to (8.1), with f(i) equal to the expression inside the summation of



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (16 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          (8.1), we get




              Next, we can apply (8.3) to (8.4), with f(i) = T(i). This transformation yields




             Note that (8.4) is the recurrence we would get if all sizes between 1 and n - 1 for
          the left group were equally likely. Thus, picking the larger of two keys as the pivot
          really doesn't affect the size distribution. We shall study recurrences of this form in
          greater detail in Chapter 9. Here we shall solve recurrence (8.5) by guessing a
          solution and showing that it works. The solution we guess is that T(n) ≤ cn log n for
          some constant c and all n ≥ 2.

             To prove that this guess is correct, we perform an induction on n. For n = 2, we
          have only to observe that for some constant c, T(2) ≤ 2c log2 = 2c. To prove the
          induction, assume T(i) ≤ ci log i for i < n, and substitute this formula for T(i) in the
          right side of (8.5) to show the resulting quantity is no greater than cn log n. Thus,
          (8.5) becomes




              Let us split the summation of (8.6) into low terms, where i ≤ n/2, and therefore log
          i is no greater than log(n/2), which is (logn) - 1, and high terms, where i > n/2, and
          log i may be as large as log n. Then (8.6) becomes




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (17 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




             If we pick c ≥ 4c2, then the sum of the second and fourth terms of (8.7) is no
          greater than zero. The third term of (8.7) makes a negative contribution, so from (8.7)
          we may claim that T(n) ≤ cn log n, if we pick c = 4c2. This completes the proof that
          quicksort requires O (n log n) time in the average case.


          Improvements to Quicksort
          Not only is quicksort fast, its average running time is less than that of all other
          currently known O(n log n) sorting algorithms (by a constant factor, of course). We
          can improve the constant factor still further if we make some effort to pick pivots
          that divide each subarray into close-to-equal parts. For example, if we always divide
          subarrays equally, then each element will be of depth exactly logn, in the tree of
          partitions analogous to Fig. 8.9. In comparison, the average depth of an element for
          quicksort as constituted in Fig. 8.14, is about 1.4logn. Thus we could hope to speed
          up quicksort by choosing pivots carefully.

              For example, we could choose three elements of a subarray at random, and pick
          the middle one as the pivot. We could pick k elements at random for any k, sort them
          either by a recursive call to quicksort or by one of the simpler sorts of Section 8.2,

          and pick the median element, that is, the         element, as pivot.† It is an
          interesting exercise to determine the best value of k, as a function of the number of
          elements in the subarray to be sorted. If we pick k too small, it costs time because on
          the average the pivot will divide the elements unequally. If we pick k too large, we
          spend too much time finding the median of the k elements.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (18 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




             Another improvement to quicksort concerns what happens when we get small
          subarrays. Recall from Section 8.2 that the simple O(n2) methods are better than the
          O(n log n) methods such as quicksort for small n. How small n is depends on many
          factors, such as the time spent making a recursive call, which is a property of the
          machine architecture and the strategy for implementing procedure calls used by the
          compiler of the language in which the sort is written. Knuth [1973] suggests 9 as the
          size subarray on which quicksort should call a simpler sorting algorithm.

             There is another "speedup" to quicksort that is really a way to trade space for
          time. The same idea will work for almost any sorting algorithm. If we have the space
          available, create an array of pointers to the records in array A. We make the
          comparisons between the keys of records pointed to. But we don't move the records;
          rather, we move the pointers to records in the same way quicksort moves the records
          themselves. At the end, the pointers, read in left-to-right order, point to the records in
          the desired order, and it is then a relatively simple matter to rearrange the records of
          A into the correct order.

             In this manner, we make only n swaps of records, instead of O(n log n) swaps,
          which makes a substantial difference if records are large. On the negative side, we
          need extra space for the array of pointers, and accessing keys for comparisons is
          slower than it was, since we have first to follow a pointer, then go into the record, to
          get the key field.


          8.4 Heapsort
          In this section we develop a sorting algorithm called heapsort whose worst case as
          well as average case running time is O(nlogn). This algorithm can be expressed
          abstractly using the four set operations INSERT, DELETE, EMPTY, and MIN
          introduced in Chapters 4 and 5. Suppose L is a list of the elements to be sorted and S
          a set of elements of type recordtype, which will be used to hold the elements as they
          are being sorted. The MIN operator applies to the key field of records; that is,
          MIN(S) returns the record in S with the smallest key value. Figure 8.16 presents the
          abstract sorting algorithm that we shall transform into heapsort.


          (1)      for x on list L do
          (2)        INSERT(x, S);
          (3)      while not EMPTY(S) do begin
          (4)        y := MIN(S);
          (5)        writeln(y);
          (6)        DELETE(y, S)
                  end


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (19 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




                                          Fig. 8.16. An abstract sorting algorithm.

             In Chapters 4 and 5 we presented several data structures, such as 2-3 trees,
          capable of supporting each of these set operations in O(logn) time per operation, if
          sets never grow beyond n elements. If we assume list L is of length n, then the
          number of operations performed is n INSERT's, n MIN's, n DELETE's, and n + 1
          EMPTY tests. The total time spent by the algorithm of Fig. 8.16 is thus O(nlogn), if a
          suitable data structure is used.

              The partially ordered tree data structure introduced in Section 4.11 is well suited
          for the implementation of this algorithm. Recall that a partially ordered tree can be
          represented by a heap, an array A[1], . . . , A[n], whose elements have the partially
          ordered tree property: A[i].key ≤ A[2*i].key and A[i].key ≤ A[2*i + 1].key. If we think
          of the elements at 2i and 2i + 1 as the "children" of the element at i, then the array
          forms a balanced binary tree in which the key of the parent never exceeds the keys of
          the children.

             We showed in Section 4.11 that the partially ordered tree could support the
          operations INSERT and DELETEMIN in O(logn) time per operation. While the
          partially ordered tree cannot support the general DELETE operation in O(logn) time
          (just finding an arbitrary element takes linear time in the worst case), we should
          notice that in Fig. 8.16 the only elements we delete are the ones found to be minimal.
          Thus lines (4) and (6) of Fig. 8.16 can be combined into a DELETEMIN function
          that returns the element y. We can thus implement Fig. 8.16 using the partially
          ordered tree data structure of Section 4.11.

             We shall make one more modification to the algorithm of Fig. 8.16 to avoid
          having to print the elements as we delete them. The set S will always be stored as a
          heap in the top of array A, as A[1], . . . , A[i], if S has i elements. By the partially
          ordered tree property, the smallest element is always in A[1]. The elements already
          deleted from S can be stored in A [i + 1], . . . ,A [n], sorted in reverse order, that is,
          with A[i + 1] ≥ A[i + 2]≥ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ≥ A[n].† Since A[1] must be smallest among A[1], . . . ,
          A[i], we may effect the DELETEMIN operation by simply swapping A[1] with A[i].
          Since the new A[i] (the old A[1]) is no smaller than A[i + 1] (or else the former would
          have been deleted from S before the latter), we now have A[i], . . . , A[n] sorted in
          decreasing order. We may now regard S as occupying A[1], . . . ,A [i - 1].

             Since the new A[1] (old A[i]) violates the partially ordered tree property, we must
          push it down the tree as in the procedure DELETEMIN of Fig. 4.23. Here, we use the
          procedure pushdown shown in Fig. 8.17 that operates on the externally defined array
          A. By a sequence of swaps, pushdown pushes element A[first] down through its



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (20 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          descendants to its proper position in the tree. To restore the partially ordered tree
          property to the heap, we call pushdown with first = 1.

              We now see how lines (4 - 6) of Fig. 8.16 are to be done. Selecting the minimum
          at line (4) is easy; it is always in A[l] because of the partially ordered tree property.
          Instead of printing at line (5), we swap A[1] with A[i], the last element in the current
          heap. Deleting the minimum element from the partially ordered tree is now easy; we
          just decrement i, the cursor that indicates the end of the current heap. We then invoke
          pushdown(1, i) to restore the partially ordered tree property to the heap A[1], . . . ,
          A[i].

              The test for emptiness of S at line (3) of Fig. 8.16 is done by testing the value of i,
          the cursor marking the end of the current heap. Now we have only to consider how to
          perform lines (1) and (2). We may assume L is originally present in A[1], . . . , A[n]
          in some order. To establish the partially ordered tree property initially, we call
          pushdown(j,n) for all j = n/2, n/2 - 1 , . . . , 1. We observe that after calling
          pushdown(j, n), no violations of the partially ordered tree property occur in A[j], . . . ,
          A[n] because pushing a record down the tree does not introduce new violations, since
          we only swap a violating record with its smaller child. The complete procedure,
          called heapsort, is shown in Fig. 8.18.


          Analysis of Heapsort
          Let us examine the procedure pushdown to see how long it takes. An inspection of
          Fig. 8.17 confirms that the body of the while-loop takes constant time. Also, after
          each iteration, r has at least twice the value it had before. Thus, since r starts off
          equal to first, after i iterations we have r ≥ first * 2i.


            procedure pushdown ( first, last: integer );
             { assumes A[first], . . . ,A[last] obeys partially ordered tree property
                except possibly for the children of A[first]. The procedure pushes
                A[first] down until the partially ordered tree property is restored }
             var
                r: integer; { indicates the current position of A[first] }
             begin
                r := first; { initialization }
                while r < = last div 2 do
                  if last = 2*r then begin { r has one child at 2*r }
                       if A[r].key > A[2*r].key
          then
                          swap(A[r], A[2*r]);


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (21 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




                            r := last { forces a break from the while-loop }
                         end
                     else { r has two children, elements at 2*r and 2*r + 1 }
                         if A[r].key > A[2*r].key
          and
                              A[2*r].key < = A[2*r + l].key then
          begin
                                 { swap r with left child }
                                 swap(A[r], A[2*r]);
                                 r := 2*r
                          end
                          else if A[r].key > A[2*r + l].key
          and
                               A[2*r + l].key < A[2*r].key then
          begin
                                  { swap r with right child }
                                  swap(A[r], A[2*r + 1]);
                                  r := 2*r + l
                       end
                       else { r does not violate partially ordered tree property }
                          r := last { to break while-loop }
                end; { pushdown }

                                            Fig. 8.17. The procedure pushdown.

          Surely, r > last/2 if first * 2i > last/2, that is if


                               i > log(last/first) - 1                 (8.8)

          Hence, the number of iterations of the while-loop of pushdown is at most
          log(last/first).

              Since first ≥ 1 and last ≤ n in each call to pushdown by the heapsort algorithm of
          Fig. 8.18, (8.8) says that each call to pushdown, at line (2) or (5) of Fig. 8.18, takes
          O(logn) time. Clearly the loop of lines (1) and (2) iterates n/2 times, so the time spent
          in lines (1 - 2) is O(n logn).† Also, the loop of


                 procedure heapsort;
                  { sorts array A[1], . . . ,A[n] into decreasing order }
                  var



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (22 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




                     i: integer; { cursor into A }
                   begin
                     { establish the partially ordered tree property initially }
          (1)         for i := n div 2 downto 1 do
          (2)              pushdown(i, n );
          (3)         for i := n downto 2 do begin
          (4)             swap(A[1], A[i]);
                           { remove minimum from front of heap }
          (5)             pushdown(1, i - 1)
                           { re-establish partially ordered tree property }
                     end
                 end; { heapsort }

                                             Fig. 8.18. The procedure heapsort.

          lines (3 - 5) iterates n - 1 times. Thus, a total of O(n) time is spent in all repetitions of
          swap at line (4), and O (n log n) time is spent during all repetitions of line (5). Hence,
          the total time spent in the loop of lines (3 - 5) is O (n log n ), and all of heapsort
          takes O (n log n) time.

              Despite its O (n log n) worst case time, heapsort will, on the average take more
          time than quicksort, by a small constant factor. Heapsort is of intellectual interest,
          because it is the first O(n log n) worst-case sort we have covered. It is of practical
          utility in the situation where we want not all n elements sorted, but only the smallest
          k of them for some k much less than n. As we mentioned, lines (1 - 2) really take
          only O(n) time. If we make only k iterations of lines (3 - 5), the time spent in that
          loop is O(k log n). Thus, heapsort, modified to produce only the first k elements
          takes O(n + k log n) time. If k ≤ n/log n, that is, we want at most (1/log n)th of the
          entire sorted list, then the required time is O(n).


          8.5 Bin Sorting
          One might wonder whether Ω (n log n) steps are necessary to sort n elements. In the
          next section, we shall show that to be the case for sorting algorithms that assume
          nothing about the data type of keys, except that they can be ordered by some function
          that tells whether one key value is "less than" another. We can often sort in less than
          O(n log n) time, however, when we know something special about the keys being
          sorted.

          Example 8.5. Suppose keytype is integer, and the values of the key are known to be
          in the range l to n, with no duplicates, where n is the number of elements. Then if A



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (23 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          and B are of type array[1..n] of recordtype, and the n elements to be sorted are
          initially in A, we can place them in the array B, in order of their keys by


              for i := 1 to n do
                 B[A[i].key] := A[i];                          (8.9)

          This code calculates where record A[i] belongs and places it there. The entire loop
          takes O(n) time. It works correctly only when there is exactly one record with key v
          for each value of v between 1 and n. A second record with key value v would also be
          placed in B[v], obliterating the previous record with key v.

             There are other ways to sort an array A with keys 1,2, . . . , n in place in only O(n)
          time. Visit A[1], . . . , A[n] in turn. If the record in A[i] has key j ≠ i, swap A[i] with
          A[j]. If, after swapping, the record with key k is now in A[i], and k ≠ i, swap A[i] with
          A[k], and so on. Each swap places some record where it belongs, and once a record is
          where it belongs, it is never moved. Thus, the following algorithm sorts A in place, in
          O(n) time, provided there is one record with each of keys 1, 2 , . . . , n.


              for i := 1 to n do
                 while A [i].key < > i do
                    swap(A[i], A[A[i].key]);

             The program (8.9) given in Example 8.5 is a simple example of a "binsort," a
          sorting process where we create a "bin" to hold all the records with a certain key
          value. We examine each record r to be sorted and place it in the bin for the key value
          of r. In the program (8.9) the bins are the array elements B[1], . . . , B[n], and B[i] is
          the bin for key value i. We can use array elements as bins in this simple case,
          because we know we never put more than one record in a bin. Moreover, we need not
          assemble the bins into a sorted list here, because B serves as such a list.

              In the general case, however, we must be prepared both to store more than one
          record in a bin and to string the bins together (or concatenate) the bins in proper
          order. To be specific, suppose that, as always, A[1], . . . , A[n] is an array of type
          recordtype, and that the keys for records are of type keytype. Suppose for the
          purposes of this section only, that keytype is an enumerated type, such as l..m or
          char. Let listtype be a type that represents lists of elements of type recordtype;
          listtype could be any of the types for lists mentioned in Chapter 2, but a linked list is
          most effective, since we shall be growing lists of unpredictable size in each bin, yet
          the total lengths of the lists is fixed at n, and therefore an array of n cells can supply
          the lists for the various bins as needed.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (24 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




              Finally, let B be an array of type array[keytype] of listtype. Thus, B is an array of
          bins, which are lists (or, if the linked list representation is used, headers for lists). B
          is indexed by keytype, so there is one bin for each possible key value. In this manner
          we can effect the first generalization of (8.9) -- the bins have arbitrary capacity.

              Now we must consider how the bins are to be concatenated. Abstractly, we must
          form from lists a1, a2, . . . ,ai and b1, b2, . . . , bj the concatenation of the lists, which
          is a1, a2, . . . ,ai. b1, b2, . . . ,bj. The implementation of this operation
          CONCATENATE(L1, L2), which replaces list L1 by the concatenation L1L2, can be
          done in any of the list representations we studied in Chapter 2.

             For efficiency, however, it is useful to have, in addition to a header, a pointer to
          the last element on each list (or to the header if the list is empty). This modification
          facilitates finding the last element on list L1 without running down the entire list.
          Figure 8.19 shows, by dashed lines, the revised pointers necessary to concatenate L1
          and L2 and to have the result be called L1. List L1 is assumed to "disappear" after
          concatenation, in the sense that the header and end pointer for L2 become null.




                                          Fig. 8.19. Concatenation of linked lists.

              We can now write a program to binsort arbitrary collections of records, where the
          key field is of an enumerated type. The program, shown in Fig. 8.20, is written in
          terms of list processing primitives. As we mentioned, a linked list is the preferred
          implementation, but options exist. Recall also that the setting for the procedure is that
          an array A of type array[1..n] of recordtype holds the elements to be sorted, and
          array B, of type array [keytype] of listtype represents the bins. We assume keytype
          is expressible as lowkey..highkey, as any enumerated type must be, for some
          quantities lowkey and highkey.


                 procedure binsort;
                  { binsort array A, leaving the sorted list in B[lowkey] }
                  var
                    i: integer;
                    v: keytype;
                  begin
                     { place the records into bins }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (25 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          (1)       for i := l to n do
                      { push A[i] onto the front of the bin for its key }
          (2)           INSERT(A[i], FIRST(B[A[i].key]),
          B[A[i].key]);
          (3)       for v := succ(lowkey) to highkey do
                      { concatenate all the bins onto the end of B[lowkey] }
          (4)           CONCATENATE (B[lowkey], B[v])
                 end; { binsort }

                                          Fig. 8.20. The abstract binsort program.


          Analysis of Binsort
          We claim that if there are n elements to be sorted, and there are m different key
          values (hence m different bins), then the program of Fig. 8.20 takes O(n + m) time, if
          the proper data structure for bins is used. In particular, if m ≤ n, then binsort takes
          O(n) time. The data structure we have in mind is a linked list. Pointers to list ends, as
          indicated in Fig. 8.19, are useful but not required.

             The loop of lines (1 - 2) of Fig. 8.20, which places the records in bins, takes O(n)
          time, since the INSERT operation of line (2) requires constant time, the insertion
          always occurring at the beginning of the list. For the loop of lines (3 - 4),
          concatenating the bins, temporarily assume that pointers to the ends of lists exist.
          Then step (4) takes constant time, so the loop takes O(m) time. Hence the entire
          binsort program takes O(n + m) time.

             If pointers to the ends of lists do not exist, then in line (4) we must spend time
          running down to the end of B[v] before concatenating it to B[lowkey]. In this manner,
          the end of B[lowkey] will always be available for the next concatenation. The extra
          time spent running to the end of each bin once totals O(n), since the sum of the
          lengths of the bins is n. This extra time does not affect the order of magnitude of
          running time for the algorithm, since O(n) is no greater than O(n + m).


          Sorting Large Key Sets
          If m, the number of keys, is no greater than n, the number of elements, then the O(n +
          m) running time of Fig. 8.20 is really O(n). But what if m=n2, say. Evidently Fig.
          8.20 will take O(n + n2), which is O(n2) time. But can we still take advantage of the
          fact that the key set is limited and do better? The surprising answer is that even if the
          set of possible key values is 1,2 , . . . , nk, for any fixed k, then there is a



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (26 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          generalization of the binsorting technique that takes only O(n) time.

          Example 8.6. Consider the specific problem of sorting n integers in the range 0 to n2 -
          1. We sort the n integers in two phases. The first phase appears not to be of much
          help at all, but it is essential. We use n bins, one for each of the integers 0, 1 , . . . , n -
          1. We place each integer i on the list to be sorted, into the bin numbered i mod n.
          However, unlike Fig. 8.20, it is important that we append each integer to the end of
          the list for the bin, not the beginning. If we are to append efficiently, we require the
          linked list representation of bins, with pointers to list ends.

             For example, suppose n = 10, and the list to be sorted is the perfect squares from
          02 to 92 in the random order 36, 9, 0, 25, 1, 49, 64, 16, 81, 4. In this case, where n =
          10, the bin for integer i is just the rightmost digit of i written in decimal. Fig. 8.21(a)
          shows the placement of our list into bins. Notice that integers appear in bins in the
          same order that they appear in the original list; e.g., bin 6 has contents 36, 16, not 16,
          36, since 36 precedes 16 on the original list.

              Now, we concatenate the bins in order, producing the list


                         0, 1, 81, 64, 4, 25, 36, 16, 9, 49                    (8.10)

          from Fig. 8.21(a). If we use the linked list data structure with pointers to list ends,
          then the placement of the n integers into bins and the concatenation of the bins can
          each be done in O(n) time.

              The integers on the list created by concatenating the bins are redistributed into
          bins, but using a different bin selection strategy. Now place integer i into bin [i/n],
          that is, the greatest integer equal to or less than i/n. Again, append integers to the
          ends of the lists for the bins. When we now concatenate the bins in order, we find the
          list is sorted.

             For our example, Fig. 8.21(b) shows the list (8.10) distributed into bins, with i
          going into bin [i/10].

             To see why this algorithm works, we have only to notice that when several
          integers are placed in one bin, as 0, 1, 4, and 9 were placed in bin 0, they must be in
          increasing order, since the list (8.10) resulting from the first pass ordered them by
          rightmost digit. Hence, in any bin the rightmost digits must form an increasing
          sequence. Of course, any integer placed in bin i must precede an integer placed in a
          bin higher than i, so concatenating the bins in order produces the sorted list.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (27 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




              More generally, we can think of the integers between 0 and n2 - 1 as




                                                Fig. 8.21. Two-pass binsorting.

          two-digit numbers in base n and use the same argument to see that the sorting
          strategy works. Consider the integers i = an + b and j = cn + d, where a, b, c, and d
          are each in the range 0 to n - l; i.e., they are base- n digits. Suppose i<j. Then, a>c is
          not possible, so we may assume a≤c. If a<c, then i appears in a lower bin than j after
          the second pass, so i will precede j in the final order. If a=c, then b must be less than
          d. Then after the first pass, i precedes j, since i was placed in bin b and j in bin d.
          Thus, while both i and j are placed in bin a (the same as bin c), i is inserted first, and
          j must follow it in the bin.


          General Radix Sorting
          Suppose keytype is a sequence of fields, as in


            type
               keytype = record
                 day: 1..31;
                 month: (jan , . . . , dec);                    (8.11)
                 year: 1900..1999
               end;

          or an array of elements of the same type, as in


            type
               keytype = array[1..10] of char;                          (8.12)

          We shall assume from here that keytype consists of k components, f1,f2, . . . ,fk of
          types t1, t2, . . . , tk. For example, in (8.11) t1 = 1..31, t2 = (jan , . . . , dec), and t3 =
          1900..1999. In (8.12), k = 10, and t1 = t2 = ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ = tk = char.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (28 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




             Let us also assume that we desire to sort records in the lexicographic order of
          their keys. That is, key value (a1, a2, . . . ,ak) is less than key value (b1, b2, . . . ,bk),
          where ai and bi are the values in field fi, for i = 1, 2, . . . ,k, if either

          1. a1 < b1, or
          2. a1 = b1 and a2 < b2, or


                      .
                      .
                      .

          k. a1 = b1, a2 = b2, . . . ,ak - 1=bk - 1, and ak < bk.

          That is, for some j between 0 and k - 1, a1 = b1, . . . , aj = bj, † and aj + 1 <bj + 1.

              We can view keys of the type defined above as if key values were integers
          expressed in some strange radix notation. For example, (8.12) where each field is a
          character, can be viewed as expressing integers in base 128, or however many
          characters there are in a character set for the machine at hand. Type definition (8.11)
          can be viewed as if the rightmost place were in base 100 (corresponding to the values
          between 1900 and 1999), the next place in base 12, and the third in base 31. Because
          of this view, generalized binsort has become known as radix sorting. In the extreme,
          we can even use it to sort integers up to any fixed limit by seeing them as arrays of
          digits in base 2, or another base.

             The key idea behind radix sorting is to binsort all the records, first on fk, the "least
          significant digit," then concatenate the bins, lowest value first, binsort on fk - 1, and so
          on. As in Example 8.6, when inserting into bins, make sure that each record is
          appended to the end of the list, not the beginning. The radix sorting algorithm is
          sketched in Fig. 8.22; the reason it works was illustrated in Example 8.6. In general,
          after binsorting on fk, fk - 1, . . . ,fi, the records will appear in lexicographic order if the
          key consisted only of fields fi, . . . ,fk.


          Analysis of Radix Sort
          First, we must use the proper data structures to make radix sort efficient. Notice that
          we assume the list to be sorted is already in the form of a linked list, rather than an
          array. In practice, we need only to add one additional field, the link field, to the type
          recordtype, and we can link A[i] to A[i + 1] for i=1, 2 , . . . ,n - 1 and thus make a


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (29 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          linked list out of the array A in O(n) time. Notice also that if we present the elements
          to be sorted in this way, we never copy a record. We just move records from one list
          to another.


                 procedure radixsort;
                    { sorts list A of n records with keys consisting of fields
          f1, . . . , fk
                      of types t1, . . . , tk, respectively. The
          procedure uses
                      arrays Bi of type array[ti]
          of listtype for 1 ≤ i ≤ k,
                      where listtype is a linked list of records. }
                    begin
          (1)            for i := k downto l do begin
          (2)              for each value v of type ti do {
          clear bins }
          (3)                  make Bi[v] empty;
          (4)              for each record r on list A do
          (5)                  move r from A onto the end of bin
          Bi[v],
                             where v is the value of field fi of the key of
          r;
          (6)              for each value v of type ti, from lowest to
          highest do
          (7)                  concatenate Bi[v] onto the end of A
                        end
                 end; { radixsort }

                                                     Fig. 8.22. Radix sorting.

             As before, for concatenation to be done quickly, we need pointers to the end of
          each list. Then, the loop of lines (2 - 3) in Fig. 8.22 takes O(si) time, where si is the
          number of different values of type ti. The loop of lines (4 - 5) takes O(n) time, and
          the loop of lines (6 - 7) takes O(si) time. Thus, the total time taken by radix sort is


                           , which is                      if k is assumed a constant.

          Example 8.7. If keys are integers in the range 0 to nk - 1, for some constant k, we can
          generalize Example 8.6 and view keys as base-n integers k digits long. Then ti is 0..(n



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (30 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          - 1) for all i between 1 and k, so si = n. The expression                                becomes O(n + kn)
          which, since k is a constant, is O(n).

              As another example, if keys are character strings of length k, for constant k, then


          si = 128 (say) for all i, and        is a constant. Thus radix sort on fixed length
          character strings is also O(n). In fact, whenever k is a constant and the si's are
          constant, or even O(n), then radix sort takes O(n) time. Only if k grows with n can
          radix sort not be O(n). For example, if keys are regarded as binary strings of length

          logn, then k = logn, and si = 2 for l≤i≤k. Thus radix sort would be                                         ,
          which is O(n log n).†


          8.6 A Lower Bound for Sorting by
          Comparisons
          There is a "folk theorem" to the effect that sorting n elements "requires n log n time."
          We saw in the last section that this statement is not always true; if the key type is
          such that binsort or radix sort can be used to advantage, then O(n) time suffices.
          However, these sorting algorithms rely on keys being of a special type -- a type with
          a limited set of values. All the other general sorting algorithms we have studied rely
          only on the fact that we can test whether one key value is less than another.

              The reader should notice that in all the sorting algorithms prior to Section 8.5,
          progress toward determining the proper order for the elements is made when we
          compare two keys, and then the flow for control in the algorithm goes one of only
          two ways. In contrast, an algorithm like that of Example 8.5 causes one of n different
          things to happen in only one step, by storing a record with an integer key in one of n
          bins depending on the value of that integer. All programs in Section 8.5 use a
          capability of programming languages and machines that is much more powerful than
          a simple comparison of values, namely the ability to find in one step a location in an
          array, given the index of that location. But this powerful type of operation is not
          available if keytype were, say, real. We cannot, in Pascal or most other languages,
          declare an array indexed by real numbers, and even if we could, we could not then
          concatenate in a reasonable amount of time all the bins corresponding to the
          computer-representable real numbers.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (31 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          Decision Trees
          Let us focus our attention on sorting algorithms whose only use of the elements to be
          sorted is in comparisons of two keys. We can draw a binary tree in which the nodes
          represent the "status" of the program after making some number of comparisons of
          keys. We can also see a node as representing those initial orderings of that data that
          will bring the program to this "status." Thus a program "status" is essentially
          knowledge about the initial ordering gathered so far by the program.

              If any node represents two or more possible initial orderings, then the program
          cannot yet know the correct sorted order, and so must make another comparison of
          keys, such as "is k1<k2?" We may then create two children for the node. The left
          child represents those initial orderings that are consistent with the outcome that
          k1<k2; the right child represents the orderings that are consistent with the fact that
          k1>k2.† Thus each child represents a "status" consisting of the information known at
          the parent plus either the fact k1<k2 or the fact k1>k2, depending on whether the child
          is a left or right child, respectively.

          Example 8.8. Consider the insertion sort algorithm with n = 3. Suppose that initially
          A[1], A[2], and A[3] have key values a, b, and c, respectively. Any of the six
          orderings of a, b, and c could be the correct one, so we begin construction of our
          decision tree with the node labeled (1) in Fig. 8.23, which represents all possible
          orderings. The insertion sort algorithm first compares A[2] with A[1], that is, b with
          a. If b turns out to be the smaller, then the correct ordering can only be bac, bca, or
          cba, the three orderings in which b precedes a. These three orderings are represented
          by node (2) in Fig. 8.23. The other three orderings are represented by node (3), the
          right child of (1). They are the orderings for which a precedes b.




                                 Fig. 8.23. Decision tree for insertion sort with n = 3.

             Now consider what happens if the initial data is such that we reach node (2). We
          have just swapped A[1] with A[2], and find A[2] can rise no higher since it is at the
          "top" already. The current ordering of the elements is bac. Insertion sort next begins
          inserting A[3] into its rightful place, by comparing A[3] with A[2]. Since A[2] now
          holds a and A[3] holds c, we are comparing c with a; node (4) represents the two



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (32 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          orderings from node (2) in which c precedes a, while (5) represents the one ordering
          where it does not.

             If the algorithm reaches the status of node (5), it will end, since it has already
          moved A[3] as high as it can go. On the other hand in the status of node (4), we
          found A[3]<A[2], and so swapped them, leaving b in A[1] and c in A[2]. Insertion
          sort next compares these two elements and swaps them if c<b. Nodes (8) and (9)
          represents the orderings consistent with c<b and its opposite, respectively, as well as
          the information gathered going from nodes (1) to (2) to (4), namely b<a and c<a.
          Insertion sort ends, whether or not it has swapped A[2] with A[1], making no more
          comparisons. Fortunately, each of the leaves (5), (8), and (9) represent a single
          ordering, so we have gathered enough information to determine the correct sorted
          order.

             The description of the tree descending from node (3) is quite symmetric with what
          we have seen, and we omit it. Figure 8.23, since all its leaves are associated with a
          single ordering, is seen to determine the correct sorted order of three key values a, b,
          and c.


          The Size of Decision Trees
          Figure 8.23 has six leaves, corresponding to the six possible orderings of the initial
          list a, b, c. In general, if we sort a list of n elements, there are n! = n(n - 1)(n - 2) ⋅ ⋅ ⋅
          (2)(1) possible outcomes, which are the correct sorted orders for the initial list a1, a2,
          . . . , an. That is, any of the n elements could be first, any of the remaining n - 1
          second, any of the remaining n - 2 third, and so on. Thus any decision tree describing
          a correct sorting algorithm working on a list of n elements must have at least n!
          leaves, since each possible ordering must be alone at a leaf. In fact, if we delete
          nodes corresponding to unnecessary comparisons, and if we delete leaves that
          correspond to no ordering at all (since the leaves can only be reached by an
          inconsistent series of comparison results), there will be exactly n! leaves.

              Binary trees that have many leaves must have long paths. The length of a path
          from the root to a leaf gives the number of comparisons made when the ordering
          represented by that leaf is the sorted order for a certain input list L. Thus, the length
          of the longest path from the root to a leaf is a lower bound on the number of steps
          performed by the algorithm in the worst case. Specifically, if L is the input list, the
          algorithm will make at least as many comparisons as the length of the path, in
          addition, probably, to other steps that are not comparisons of keys.

              We should therefore ask how short can all paths be in a binary tree with k leaves.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (33 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          A binary tree in which all paths are of length p or less can have 1 root, 2 nodes at
          level 1, 4 nodes at level 2, and in general, 2i nodes at level i. Thus, the largest
          number of leaves of a tree with no nodes at levels higher than p is 2p. Put another
          way, a binary tree with k leaves must have a path of length at least logk. If we let k =
          n!, then we know that any sorting algorithm that only uses comparisons to determine
          the sorted order must take Ω(log(n!)) time in the worst case.

             But how fast does log(n!) grow? A close approximation to n! is (n/e)n, where e =
          2.7183 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ is the base of natural logarithms. Since log((n/e)n) = nlogn-nloge, we see
          that log(n!) is on the order of nlogn. We can get a precise lower bound by noting that
          n(n - 1) ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ (2)(1) is the product of at least n/2 factors that are each at least n/2. Thus
          n! ≥ (n/2)n/2. Hence log(n!) ≥ (n/2)log(n/2) = (n/2)logn - n/2. Thus sorting by
          comparisons requires Ω(nlogn) time in the worst case.


          The Average Case Analysis
          One might wonder if there could be an algorithm that used only comparisons to sort,
          and took Ω(nlogn) time in the worst case, as all such algorithms must, but on the
          average took time that was O(n) or something less than O(nlogn). The answer is no,
          and we shall only mention how to prove the statement, leaving the details to the
          reader.

              What we want to prove is that in any binary tree with k leaves, the average depth
          of a leaf is at least logk. Suppose that were not the case, and let tree T be the
          counterexample with the fewest nodes. T cannot be a single node, because our
          statement says of one-leaf trees only that they have average depth of at least 0. Now
          suppose T has k leaves. A binary tree with k ≥ 2 leaves looks either like the tree in
          Fig. 8.24(a) or that in (b).




                                         Fig. 8.24. Possible forms of binary tree T.

             Figure 8.24(a) cannot be the smallest counterexample, because the tree rooted at
          n1 has as many leaves as T, but even smaller average depth. If Fig. 8.24(b) were T,
          then the trees rooted at n1 and n2, being smaller then T, would not violate our claim.
          That is, the average depth of leaves in T1 is at least log(k1), and the average depth in
          T2 is at least log(k2). Then the average depth in T is



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (34 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




              Since k1 + k2 = k, we can express the average depth as




          The reader can check that when k1 = k2 = k/2, (8.13) has value logk. The reader must
          show that (8.13) has a minimum when k1 = k2, given the constraint that k1 + k2 = k.
          We leave this proof as an exercise to the reader skilled in differential calculus.
          Granted that (8.13) has a minimum value of logk, we see that T was not a
          counterexample at all.


          8.7 Order Statistics
          The problem of computing order statistics is, given a list of n records and an integer
          k, to find the key of the record that is kth in the sorted order of the records. In general,
          we refer to this problem as "finding the kth out of n." Special cases occur when k = 1
          (finding the minimum), k = n (finding the maximum), and the case where n is odd
          and k = (n + 1)/2, called finding the median.

             Certain cases of the problem are quite easy to solve in linear time. For example,
          finding the minimum of n elements in O (n) time requires no special insight. As we
          mentioned in connection with heapsort, if k ≤ n/logn then we can find the kth out of n
          by building a heap, which takes O (n) time, and then selecting the k smallest
          elements in O(n + k log n) = O(n) time. Symmetrically, we can find the kth of n in
          O(n) time when k ≥ n - n/log n.


          A Quicksort Variation
          Probably the fastest way, on the average, to find the kth out of n is to use a recursive
          procedure similar to quicksort, call it select(i, j, k), that finds the kth element among
          A[i], . . . , A[j] within some larger array A [1], . . . , A [n]. The basic steps of select
          are:

               1. Pick a pivot element, say v.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (35 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




               2. Use the procedure partition from Fig. 8.13 to divide A[i], . . . , A [j] into two
                  groups: A[i], . . . , A[m - 1] with keys less than v, and A [m], . . . , A [j] with
                  keys v or greater.

               3. If k ≤ m - i, so the kth among A [i], . . . , A [j] is in the first group, then call
                  select(i, m - 1, k) . If k > m - i, then call select(m, j, k - m + i).

             Eventually we find that select(i, j, k) is called, where all of A[i], . . . , A [j] have
          the same key (usually because j=i). Then we know the desired key; it is the key of
          any of these records.

             As with quicksort, the function select outlined above can take Ω(n2) time in the
          worst case. For example, suppose we are looking for the first element, but by bad
          luck, the pivot is always the highest available key. However, on the average, select is
          even faster than quicksort; it takes O(n) time. The principle is that while quicksort
          calls itself twice, select calls itself only once. We could analyze select as we did
          quicksort, but the mathematics is again complex, and a simple intuitive argument
          should be convincing. On the average, select calls itself on a subarray half as long as
          the subarray it was given. Suppose that to be conservative, we say that each call is on
          an array 9/10 as long as the previous call. Then if T(n) is the time spent by select on
          an array of length n, we know that for some constant c we have




          Using techniques from the next chapter, we can show that the solution to (8.14) is
          T(n) = O(n).


          A Worst-Case Linear Method for Finding
          Order Statistics
          To guarantee that a function like select has worst case, rather than average case,
          complexity O(n), it suffices to show that in linear time we can find some pivot that is
          guaranteed to be some positive fraction of the way from either end. For example, the

          solution to (8.14) shows that if the pivot of n elements is never less than the

          element, nor greater than the        element, so the recursive call to select is on at
          most nine-tenths of the array, then this variant of select will be O(n) in the worst



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (36 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          case.

              The trick to finding a good pivot is contained in the following two steps.

               1. Divide the n elements into groups of 5, leaving aside between 0 and 4
                  elements that cannot be placed in a group. Sort each group of 5 by any
                  algorithm and take the middle element from each group, a total of n/5
                  elements.

               2. Use select to find the median of these n/5 elements, or if n/5 is even, an
                  element in a position as close to the middle as possible. Whether n/5 is even

                    or odd, the desired element is in position                           .

          This pivot is far from the extremes, provided that not too many records have the
          pivot for key.† To simplify matters let us temporarily assume that all keys are

          different. Then we claim the chosen pivot, the                               element of the               middle

          elements out of groups of 5 is greater than at least                                 of the n elements. For it

          exceeds                of the middle elements, and each of those exceeds two more, from

          the five of which it is the middle. If n ≥ 75, then                                is at least n/4. Similarly,

          we may check that the chosen pivot is less than or equal to at least
          elements, so for n ≥ 75, the pivot lies between the 1/4 and 3/4 point in the sorted
          order. Most importantly, when we use the pivot to partition the n elements, the kth
          element will be isolated to within a range of at most 3n/4 of the elements. A sketch
          of the complete algorithm is given in Fig. 8.25; as for the sorting algorithms it
          assumes an array A[1], . . . , A[n] of recordtype, and that recordtype has a field key of
          type keytype. The algorithm to find the kth element is just a call to select(1,n,k), of
          course.


              function select ( i, j, k: integer ): keytype;
                { returns the key of the kth element in sorted order
                   among A[i], . . . ,A[j] }
                var
                   m: integer; { used as index }
                begin
          (1)       if j-i < 74 then begin { too few to use select recursively }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (37 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          (2)                 sort A[i], . . . ,A[j] by some simple algorithm;
          (3)                 return (A[i + k - 1 ].key)
                        end
                        else begin { apply select recursively }
          (4)               for m := 0 to (j - i - 4) div 5 do
                              { get the middle elements of groups of 5
                                 into A[i], A[i + 1], . . . }
          (5)                  find the third element among A[i + 5*m] through
                                 A[i + 5*m + 4] and swap it with A[i +
          m];
          (6)             pivot := select(i, i+(j-i-4) div 5, (j -
          i - 4) div 10);
                            { find median of middle elements. Note j - i - 4
                               here is n - 5 in the informal description above }
          (7)             m := partition(i, j, pivot);
          (8)             if k <= m - i then
          (9)                 return (select(i, m - 1, k))
                         else
          (10)                 return (select(m, j, k-(m - i)))
                     end
                   end; { select }

                          Fig. 8.25. Worst-case linear algorithm for finding kth element.

              To analyze the running time of select of Fig. 8.25, let n be j - i + 1. Lines (2) and
          (3) are only executed if n is 74 or less. Thus, even though step (2) may take O(n2)
          steps in general, there is some constant c1, however large, such that for n ≤ 74, lines
          (1 - 3) take no more than c1 time.

             Now consider lines (4 - 10). Line (7), the partition step, was shown in connection
          with quicksort to take O(n) time. The loop of lines (4 - 5) is iterated about n/5 times,
          and each execution of line (5), requiring the sorting of 5 elements, takes some
          constant time, so the loop takes O(n) time as a whole.

             Let T(n) be the time taken by a call to select on n elements. Then line (6) takes at
          most T(n/5) time. Since n ≥ 75 when line (10) is reached, and we have argued that if
          n ≥ 75, at most 3n/4 elements are less than the pivot, and at most 3n/4 are equal to or
          greater than the pivot, we know that line (9) or (10) takes time at most T(3n/4).
          Hence, for some constants c1 and c2 we have




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (38 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




             The term c2n in (8.15) represents lines (1), (4), (5), and (7); the term T(n/5) comes
          from line (6), and T(3n/4) represents lines (9) and (10).

             We shall show that T(n) in (8.15) is O(n). Before we proceed, the reader should
          now appreciate that the "magic number" 5, the size of the groups in line (5), and our
          selection of n = 75 as the breakpoint below which we did not use select recursively,
          were designed so the arguments n/5 and 3n/4 of T in (8.15) would sum to something
          less than n. Other choices of these parameters could be made, but observe when we
          solve (8.15) how the fact that 1/5 + 3/4 < 1 is needed to prove linearity.

             Equation (8.15) can be solved by guessing a solution and verifying by induction
          that it holds for all n. We shall chose a solution of the form cn, for some constant c. If
          we pick c ≥ c1, we know T(n) ≤ cn for all n between 1 and 74, so consider the case n
          ≥ 75. Assume by induction that T(m) ≤ cm for m<n. Then by (8.15),

                        T(n) ≤ c2n + cn/5 + 3cn/4 ≤ c2n + 19cn/20                         (8.16)

          If we pick c = max(c1, 20c2), then by (8.16), we have T(n) ≤ cn/20 + cn/5 + 3cn/4 =
          cn, which we needed to show. Thus, T(n) is O(n).


          The Case Where Some Equalities Among
          Keys Exist
          Recall that we assumed no two keys were equal in Fig. 8.25. The reason this
          assumption was needed is that otherwise line (7) cannot be shown to partition A into
          blocks of size at most 3n/4. The modification we need to handle key equalities is to
          add, after step (7), another step like partition, that groups together all records with
          key equal to the pivot. Say there are p ≥ 1 such keys. If m - i ≤ k ≤ m - i + p, then no
          recursion is necessary; simply return A[m].key. Otherwise, line (8) is unchanged, but
          line (10) calls select(m + p, j, k - (m - i) - p).


          Exercises


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (39 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




               a. What modifications to the quicksort algorithm of Fig. 8.14 do we have to
                  make to avoid infinite loops when there is a sequence of equal elements?
               b. Show that the modified quicksort has average-case running time O(n log n).


                        Here are eight integers: 1, 7, 3, 2, 0, 5, 0, 8. Sort them using (a)
                8.1
                        bubblesort, (b) insertion sort, and (c) selection sort.

                    Here are sixteen integers: 22, 36, 6, 79, 26, 45, 75, 13, 31, 62, 27, 76, 33,
                8.2 16, 62, 47. Sort them using (a) quicksort, (b) insertion sort, (c) heapsort,
                    and (d) bin sort, treating them as pairs of digits in the range 0-9.

                        The procedure Shellsort of Fig. 8.26, sometimes called diminishing-
                        increment sort, sorts an array A[1..n] of integers by sorting n/2 pairs
                        (A[i],A[n/2 + i]) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n/2 in the first pass, n/4 four-tuples (A[i],
                        A[n/4 + i], A[n/2 + i], A[3n/4 + i]) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n/4 in the second pass, n/8
                        eight-tuples in the third pass, and so on. In each pass the sorting is done
                        using insertion sort in which we stop sorting once we encounter two
                        elements in the proper order.


                         procedure Shellsort ( var A: array[l..n]
                    of integer );
                         var
                           i, j, incr: integer;
                         begin
                           incr := n div 2;
                           while incr > 0 do begin
                              for i := incr + l to n do begin
                                  j := i - incr;
                                  while j > 0 do
                                     if A[j] > A[j + incr] then begin
                                        swap(A[j], A[j + incr]);
                8.3                     j := j - incr
                                     end
                                     else
                                        j := 0 { break }
                              end;
                              incr := incr div 2
                           end
                         end; { Shellsort }

                                                             Fig. 8.26. Shellsort.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (40 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




                             a. Sort the sequences of integers in Exercises 8.1 and 8.2 using
                                Shellsort.
                             b. Show that if A[i] and A[n/2k + i] became sorted in pass k (i.e., they
                                were swapped), then these two elements remain sorted in pass k +
                                1.
                             c. The distances between elements compared and swapped in a pass
                                diminish as n/2, n/4, . . . , 2, 1 in Fig. 8.26. Show that Shellsort
                                will work with any sequence of distances as long as the last
                                distance is 1.
                             d. Show that Shellsort works in O (n1.5) time.


                   Suppose you are to sort a list L consisting of a sorted list followed by a
              *8.4 few "random" elements. Which of the sorting methods discussed in this
                   chapter would be especially suitable for such a task?

                        A sorting algorithm is stable if it preserves the original order of records
              *8.5
                        with equal keys. Which of the sorting methods in this chapter are stable?

                        Suppose we use a variant of quicksort where we always choose as the
              *8.6
                        pivot the first element in the subarray being sorted.

                        Show that any sorting algorithm that moves elements only one position at
                8.7     a time must have time complexity at least Ω(n2).


                    In heapsort the procedure pushdown of Fig. 8.17 establishes the partially
                    ordered tree property in time O(n). Instead of starting at the leaves and
                8.8 pushing elements down to form a heap, we could start at the root and
                    push elements up. What is the time complexity of this method?


                        Suppose we have a set of words, i.e., strings of the letters a - z, whose
                        total length is n. Show how to sort these words in O(n) time. Note that if
              *8.9      the maximum length of a word is constant, binsort will work. However,
                        you must consider the case where some of the words are very long.


                        Show that the average-case running time of insertion sort is Ω(n2).
            *8.10




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (41 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




                  Consider the following algorithm randomsort to sort an array A[1..n] of
                  integers: If the elements A[1], A[2], . . . , A[n] are in sorted order, stop;
            *8.11 otherwise, choose a random number i between 1 and n, swap A[1] and
                  A[i], and repeat. What is the expected running time of randomsort?


                  We showed that sorting by comparisons takes Ω(n log n) comparisons in
                  the worse case. Prove that this lower bound holds in the average case as
            *8.12
                  well.


                  Prove that the procedure select, described informally at the beginning of
            *8.13 Section 8.7, has average case running time of O(n).


                        Implement CONCATENATE for the data structure of Fig. 8.19.
            *8.14

                  Write a program to find the k smallest elements in an array of length n.
                  What is the time complexity of your program? For what value of k does it
            *8.15
                  become advantageous to sort the array?


                  Write a program to find the largest and smallest elements in an array. Can
            *8.16 this be done in fewer than 2n - 3 comparisons?


                  Write a program to find the mode (the most frequently occurring element)
            *8.17 of a list of elements. What is the time complexity of your program?


                  Show that any algorithm to purge duplicates from a list requires at least
                  Ω(n log n) time under the decision tree model of computation of Section
            *8.18
                  8.6.


                  Suppose we have k sets, S1, S2, . . . , Sk, each containing n real numbers.
                  Write a program to list all sums of the form s1 + s2 + . . . + sk, where si is
            *8.19
                  in Si, in sorted order. What is the time complexity of your program?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (42 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




                  Suppose we have a sorted array of strings s1, s2, . . . , sn. Write a program
                  to determine whether a given string x is a member of this sequence. What
            *8.20 is the time complexity of your program as a function of n and the length
                  of x?




          Bibliographic Notes
          Knuth [1973] is a comprehensive reference on sorting methods. Quicksort is due to
          Hoare [1962] and subsequent improvements to it were published by Singleton [1969]
          and Frazer and McKellar [1970]. Heapsort was discovered by Williams [1964] and
          improved by Floyd [1964]. The decision tree complexity of sorting was studied by
          Ford and Johnson [1959]. The linear selection algorithm in Section 8.7 is from Blum,
          Floyd, Pratt, Rivest, and Tarjan [1972].

             Shellsort is due to Shell [1959] and its performance has been analyzed by Pratt
          [1979]. See Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [1974] for one solution to Exercise 8.9.

          † Technically, quicksort is only O(n log n) in the average case; it is O(n2) in the
          worst case.

          ‡We could copy A[i], . . . ,A[j] and arrange them as we do so, finally copying the
          result back into A[i], . . . ,A[j]. We choose not to do so because that approach would
          waste space and take longer than the in-place arrangement method we use.

          † If there is reason to believe nonrandom orders of elements might make quicksort
          run slower than expected, the quicksort program should permute the elements of the
          array at random before sorting.

          † Since we only want the median, not the entire sorted list of k elements, it may be
          better to use one of the fast median-finding algorithms of Section 8.7.

          † We could at the end, reverse array A, but if we wish A to end up sorted lowest first,
          then simply apply a DELETEMAX operator in place of DELETEMIN, and partially
          order A in such a way that a parent has a key no smaller (rather than no larger) than
          its children.

          † In fact, this time is O(n), by a more careful argument. For j in the range n/2 to
          n/4+1, (8.8) says only one iteration of pushdown's while-loop is needed. For j



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (43 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 8: Sorting




          between n/4 and n/8+1, only two iterations, and so on. The total number of iterations
          as j ranges between n/2 and 1 is bounded by                     Note that the
          improved bound for lines (1 - 2) does not imply an improved bound for heapsort as a
          whole; all the time is taken in lines (3 - 5).

          † Note that a sequence ranging from 1 to 0 (or more generally, from x to y, where y <
          x) is deemed to be an empty sequence.

          † But in this case, if log n-bit integers can fit in one word, we are better off treating
          keys as consisting of one field only, of type l..n, and using ordinary binsort.

          † We may as well assume all keys are different, since if we can sort a collection of
          distinct keys we shall surely produce a correct order when some keys are the same.

          † In the extreme case, when all keys are equal, the pivot provides no separation at all.
          Obviously the pivot is the kth element for any k, and another approach is needed.

                                            Table of Contents           Go to Chapter 9




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1208.htm (44 of 44) [1.7.2001 19:22:21]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_1.gif [1.7.2001 19:22:26]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_2.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_2.gif [1.7.2001 19:22:31]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_3.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_3.gif [1.7.2001 19:22:41]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_4.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_4.gif [1.7.2001 19:22:47]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_5.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_5.gif [1.7.2001 19:22:53]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_7.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_7.gif [1.7.2001 19:23:02]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_9.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_9.gif [1.7.2001 19:23:11]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_11.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_11.gif [1.7.2001 19:23:17]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_13.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_13.gif [1.7.2001 19:23:23]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_14.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_14.gif [1.7.2001 19:23:28]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:23:40]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_16.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_16.gif [1.7.2001 19:23:52]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_17.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_17.gif [1.7.2001 19:24:03]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_18.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_18.gif [1.7.2001 19:24:14]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_19.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_19.gif [1.7.2001 19:24:18]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_20.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f7_20.gif [1.7.2001 19:24:24]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          Algorithm Analysis
          Techniques
          What is a good algorithm? There is no easy answer to this question. Many of the
          criteria for a good algorithm involve subjective issues such as simplicity, clarity, and
          appropriateness for the expected data. A more objective, but not necessarily more
          important, issue is run-time efficiency. Section 1.5 covered the basic techniques for
          establishing the running time of simple programs. However, in more complex cases
          such as where programs are recursive, some new techniques are needed. This short
          chapter presents some general techniques for solving recurrence equations that arise
          in the analysis of the running times of recursive algorithms.


          9.1 Efficiency of Algorithms
          One way to determine the run-time efficiency of an algorithm is to program it and
          measure the execution time of the particular implementation on a specific computer
          for a selected set of inputs. Although popular and useful, this approach has some
          inherent problems. The running times depend not only on the underlying algorithm,
          but also on the instruction set of the computer, the quality of the compiler, and the
          skill of the programmer. The implementation may also be tuned to work well on the
          particular set of test inputs chosen. These dependencies may become strikingly
          evident with a different computer, a different compiler, a different programmer, or a
          different set of test inputs. To overcome these objections, computer scientists have
          adopted asymptotic time complexity as a fundamental measure of the performance of
          an algorithm. The term efficiency will refer to this measure, and particularly to the
          worst-case (as opposed to average) time complexity.

             The reader should recall from Chapter 1 the definitions of O(f(n)) and Ω(f(n)).
          The efficiency, i.e., worst-case complexity, of an algorithm is said to be O(f(n)), or
          just f(n) for short, if the function of n that gives the maximum, over all inputs of
          length n, of the number of steps taken by the algorithm on that input, is O(f(n)). Put
          another way, there is some constant c such that for sufficiently large n, cf(n) is an
          upper bound on the number of steps taken by the algorithm on any input of length n.

              There is the implication in the assertion that "the efficiency of a given algorithm
          is f(n)" that the efficiency is also Ω(f(n)), so that f(n) is the slowest growing function
          of n that bounds the worst-case running time from above. However, this latter
          requirement is not part of the definition of O(f(n)), and sometimes it is not possible
          to be sure that we have the slowest growing upper bound.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (1 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:51]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




              Our definition of efficiency ignores constant factors in running time, and there are
          several pragmatic reasons for doing so. First, since most algorithms are written in a
          high level language, we must describe them in terms of "steps," which each take a
          constant amount of time when translated into the machine language of any computer.
          However, exactly how much time a step requires depends not only on the step itself,
          but on the translation process and the instruction repertoire of the machine. Thus to
          attempt to be more precise than to say that the running time of an algorithm is "on
          the order of f(n)", i.e., O(f(n)), would bog us down in the details of specific machines
          and would apply only to those machines.

             A second important reason why we deal with asymptotic complexity and ignore
          constant factors is that the asymptotic complexity, far more than constant factors,
          determines for what size inputs the algorithm may be used to provide solutions on a
          computer. Chapter 1 discussed this viewpoint in detail. The reader should be alert,
          however, to the possibility that for some very important problems, like sorting, we
          may find it worthwhile to analyze algorithms in such detail that statements like
          "algorithm A should run twice as fast as algorithm B on a typical computer" are
          possible.

              A second situation in which it may pay to deviate from our worst- case notion of
          efficiency occurs when we know the expected distribution of inputs to an algorithm.
          In such situations, average case analysis can be much more meaningful than worst
          case analysis. For example, in the previous chapter we analyzed the average running
          time of quicksort under the assumption that all permutations of the correct sorted
          order are equally likely to occur as inputs.


          9.2 Analysis of Recursive Programs
          In Chapter 1 we showed how to analyze the running time of a program that does not
          call itself recursively. The analysis for a recursive program is rather different,
          normally involving the solution of a difference equation. The techniques for solving
          difference equations are sometimes subtle, and bear considerable resemblance to the
          methods for solving differential equations, some of whose terminology we borrow.

             Consider the sorting program sketched in Fig. 9.1. There the procedure mergesort
          takes a list of length n as input, and returns a sorted list as its output. The procedure
          merge(L1, L2) takes as input two sorted lists L1 and L2, scans them each, element by
          element, from the front. At each step, the larger of the two front elements is deleted
          from its list and emitted as output. The result is a single sorted list containing the
          elements of L1 and L2. The details of merge are not important here, although we




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (2 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          discuss this sorting algorithm in detail in Chapter 11. What is important is that the
          time taken by merge on lists of length n/2 is O(n).


             function mergesort ( L: LIST; n: integer ): LIST;
               { L is a list of length n. A sorted version of L
                 is returned. We assume n is a power of 2. }
               var
                   L1, L2: LIST
               begin
                   if n = 1 then
                      return (L);
                   else begin
                      break L into two halves, L1 and L2,
          each of length n/2;
                      return (merge (mergesort (L1,n/2),
          mergesort(L2, n/2)));
                   end
               end; { mergesort }

                                         Fig. 9.1. Recursive procedure mergesort.

              Let T(n) be the worst case running time of the procedure mergesort of Fig. 9.1.
          We can write a recurrence (or difference) equation that upper bounds T(n), as
          follows




          The term c1 in (9.1) represents the constant number of steps taken when L has length
          1. In the case that n > 1, the time taken by mergesort can be divided into two parts.
          The recursive calls to mergesort on lists of length n/2 each take time T(n/2), hence
          the term 2T(n/2). The second part consists of the test to discover that n ≠ 1, the
          breaking of list L into two equal parts and the procedure merge. These three
          operations take time that is either a constant, in the case of the test, or proportional to
          n for the split and the merge. Thus the constant c2 can be chosen so the term c2n is an
          upper bound on the time taken by mergesort to do everything except the recursive
          calls. We now have equation (9.1).

              Observe that (9.1) applies only when n is even, and hence it will provide an upper



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (3 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          bound in closed form (that is, as a formula for T(n) not involving any T(m) for m < n)
          only if n is a power of 2. However, even if we only know T(n) when n is a power of
          2, we have a good idea of T(n) for all n. In particular, for essentially all algorithms,
          we may suppose that T(n) lies between T(2i) and T(2i+1) if n lies between 2i and 2i+1.
          Moreover, if we devote a little more effort to finding the solution, we could replace
          the term 2T(n/2) in (9.1) by T((n+1)/2) + T((n-1)/2) for odd n > 1. Then we could
          solve the revised difference equation to get a closed form solution for all n.


          9.3 Solving Recurrence Equations
          There are three different approaches we might take to solving a recurrence equation.

               1. Guess a solution f(n) and use the recurrence to show that T(n) ≤ f(n).
                  Sometimes we guess only the form of f(n), leaving some parameters
                  unspecified (e.g., guess f(n) = an2 for some a) and deduce suitable values for
                  the parameters as we try to prove T(n) ≤ f(n) for all n.
               2. Use the recurrence itself to substitute for any T(m), m<n, on the right until all
                  terms T(m) for m>1 have been replaced by formula involving only T(1). Since
                  T(1) is always a constant, we have a formula for T(n) in terms of n> and
                  constants. This formula is what we have referred to as a "closed form" for
                  T(n).
               3. Use the general solution to certain recurrence equations of common types
                  found in this section or elsewhere (see the bibliographic notes).

          This section examines the first two methods.


          Guessing a Solution
          Example 9.1. Consider method (1) applied to Equation (9.1). Suppose we guess that
          for some a, T(n) = anlogn. Substituting n = 1, we see that this guess will not work,
          because anlogn has value 0, independent of the value of a. Thus, we might next try
          T(n) = anlogn + b. Now n = 1 requires that b ≥ c1.

              For the induction, we assume that


                        T(k) ≤ aklogk +
          b                   (9.2)




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (4 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          for all k < n and try to establish that


                        T(n) ≤ anlogn +
          b


          To begin our proof, assume n ≥ 2. From (9.1), we have


                   T(n) ≤
          2T(n/2)+c2n


          From (9.2), with k = n/2, we obtain




          provided a ≥ c2 + b.

             We thus see that T(n) ≤ anlogn + b holds provided two constraints are satisfied: b
          ≥ c1 and a ≥ c2 + b. Fortunately, there are values we can choose for a that satisfy
          these two constraints. For example, choose b = c1 and a = c1 + c2. Then, by induction
          on n, we conclude that for all n ≥ 1


                    T(n) ≤ (c1 +
          c2)nlogn + c1        (9.4)


          In other words, T(n) is O(nlogn).

             Two observations about Example 9.1 are in order. If we assume that T(n) is
          O(f(n)), and our attempt to prove T(n) ≤ cf(n) by induction fails, it does not follow
          that T(n) is not O(f(n)). In fact, an inductive hypothesis of the form T(n) ≤ cf(n) - 1
          may succeed!



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (5 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




              Secondly we have not yet determined the exact asymptotic growth rate for f(n),
          although we have shown that it is no worse than O(nlogn). If we guess a slower
          growing solution, like f(n) = an, or f(n) = anloglogn, we cannot prove the claim that
          T(n) ≤ f(n). However, the matter can only be settled conclusively by examining
          mergesort and showing that it really does take Ω(nlogn) time; in fact, it takes time
          proportional to nlogn on all inputs, not just on the worst possible inputs. We leave
          this observation as an exercise.

             Example 9.1 exposes a general technique for proving some function to be an
          upper bound on the running time of an algorithm. Suppose we are given the
          recurrence equation


                 T(1) = c

                T(n) ≤ g(T(n/2),
          n), for n > 1                    (9.5)


          Note that (9.5) generalizes (9.1), where g(x, y) is 2x + c2y. Also observe that we
          could imagine equations more general than (9.5). For example, the formula g might
          involve all of T(n-1), T(n-2), . . . , T(1), not just T(n/2). Also, we might be given
          values for T(1), T(2), . . . , T(k), and the recurrence would then apply only for n > k.
          The reader can, as an exercise, consider how to solve these more general recurrences
          by method (1) -- guessing a solution and verifying it.

              Let us turn our attention to (9.5) rather than its generalizations. Suppose we guess
          a function f(a1, . . . , aj, n), where a1, . . . , aj are parameters, and attempt to prove by
          induction on n that T(n) ≤ f(a1, . . . , aj, n). For example, our guess in Example 9.1
          was f(a1, a2, n) = a1nlogn + a2, but we used a and b for a1 and a2. To check that for
          some values of a1, . . . , aj we have T(n) ≤ f(a1, . . . , aj, n) for all n ≥ 1, we must
          satisfy


            f(a1, . . . , aj, 1) ≥ c

            f(a1, . . . , aj, n) ≥ g(f(a1, . . . ,
          aj, n/2), n) (9.6)




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (6 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          That is, by the inductive hypothesis, we may substitute f for T on the right side of the
          recurrence (9.5) to get



               T(n) ≤
          g(f(a1, . . . , aj, n/2),
          n)            (9.7)


             When the second line of (9.6) holds, we can combine it with (9.7) to prove that
          T(n) ≤ f(a1, . . . , an, n), which is what we wanted to prove by induction on n.

             For example, in Example 9.1, we have g(x, y) = 2x + c2y and f(a1, a2, n) =
          a1nlogn + a2. Here we must try to satisfy




          As we discussed, a2 = c1 and a1 = c1 + c2 is a satisfactory choice.


          Expanding Recurrences
          If we cannot guess a solution, or we are not sure we have the best bound on T(n), we
          can use a method that in principle always succeeds in solving for T(n) exactly,
          although in practice we often have trouble summing series and must resort to
          computing an upper bound on the sum. The general idea is to take a recurrence like
          (9.1), which says T(n) ≤ 2T(n/2) + c2n, and use it to get a bound on T(n/2) by
          substituting n/2 for n. That is


                        T(n/2) ≤ 2T(n/4) +
          c2n/2           (9.8)


          Substituting the right side of (9.8) for T(n/2) in (9.1) yields




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (7 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




            T(n) ≤ 2(2T(n/4) +
          c2n/2) + c2n = 4T(n/4) +
          2c2n (9.9)


             Similarly, we could substitute n/4 for n in (9.1) and use it to get a bound on
          T(n/4). That bound, which is 2T(n/8) + c2n/4, can be substituted in the right of (9.9)
          to yield


                   T(n) ≤
          8T(n/8)+3c2n                        (9.10)


             Now the reader should perceive a pattern. By induction on i we can obtain the
          relationship


                    T(n) ≤
          2iT(n/2i)+ic2n                     (9.11)


          for any i. Assuming n is a power of 2, say 2k, this expansion process comes to a halt
          as soon as we get T(1) on the right of (9.11). That will occur when i = k, whereupon
          (9.11) becomes


                    T(n) ≤
          2kT(1) + kc2n
               (9.12)


          Then, since 2k = n, we know k = logn. As T(1) ≤ c1, (9.12) becomes


                    T(n) ≤
          c1n + c2nlogn
               (9.13)


          Equation (9.13) is actually as tight a bound as we can put on T(n), and proves that



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (8 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          T(n) is O(nlogn).


          9.4 A General Solution for a Large Class
          of Recurrences
          Consider the recurrence that one gets by dividing a problem of size n into a
          subproblems each of size n/b. For convenience, we assume that a problem of size 1
          takes one time unit and that the time to piece together the solutions to the
          subproblems to make a solution for the size n problem is d(n), in the same time units.
          For our mergesort example, we have a = b = 2, and d(n) = c2n/c1, in units of c1. Then
          if T(n) is the time to solve a problem of size n, we have


                   T(1) = 1

                   T(n) = aT(n/b) + d(n)
          (9.14)


          Note that (9.14) only applies to n's that are an integer power of b, but if we assume
          T(n) is smooth, getting a tight upper bound on T(n) for those values of n tells us how
          T(n) grows in general.

             Also note that we use equality in (9.14) while in (9.1) we had an inequality. The
          reason is that here d(n) can be arbitrary, and therefore exact, while in (9.1) the
          assumption that c2n was the worst case time to merge, for one constant c2 and all n,
          was only an upper bound; the actual worst case running time on inputs of size n may
          have been less than 2T(n/2) + c2n. Actually, whether we use = or ≤ in the recurrence
          makes little difference, since we wind up with an upper bound on the worst case
          running time anyway.

             To solve (9.14) we use the technique of repeatedly substituting for T on the right
          side, as we did for a specific example in our previous discussion of expanding
          recurrences. That is, substituting n/bi for n in the second line of (9.14) yields




          Thus, starting with (9.14) and substituting (9.15) for i = 1, 2, . . . , we get




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (9 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          Now, if we assume n = bk, we can use the fact that T(n/bk) = T(1) = 1 to get from the
          above, with i = k, the formula




          If we use the fact that k = logbn, the first term of (9.16) can be written as alogbn , or
          equivalently nlogba (take logarithms to the base b of both expressions to see that they
          are the same). This expression is n to a constant power. For example, in the case of
          mergesort, where a = b = 2, the first term is n. In general, the larger a is, i.e., the
          more subproblems we need to solve, the higher the exponent will be; the higher b is,
          i.e., the smaller each subproblem is, the lower will be the exponent.


          Homogeneous and Particular Solutions
          It is interesting to see the different roles played by the two terms in (9.16). The first,
          ak or nlogba, is called the homogeneous solution, in analogy with differential equation
          terminology. The homogeneous solution is the exact solution when d(n), called the
          driving function, is 0 for all n. In other words, the homogeneous solution represents
          the cost of solving all the subproblems, even if subproblems can be combined "for
          free."

             On the other hand, the second term of (9.16) represents the cost of creating the
          subproblems and combining their results. We call this term the particular solution.
          The particular solution is affected by both the driving function and the number and
          size of subproblems. As a rule of thumb if the homogeneous solution is greater than
          the driving function, then the particular solution has the same growth rate as the
          homogeneous solution. If the driving function grows faster than the homogeneous
          solution by more than n∈ for some ∈ > 0, then the particular solution has the same


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (10 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          growth rate as the driving function. If the driving function has the same growth rate
          as the homogeneous solution, or grows faster by at most logkn for some k, then the
          particular solution grows as logn times the driving function.

              It is important to recognize that when searching for improvements in an
          algorithm, we must be alert to whether the homogeneous solution is larger than the
          driving function. For example, if the homogeneous solution is larger, then finding a
          faster way to combine subproblems will have essentially no effect on the efficiency
          of the overall algorithm. What we must do in that case is find a way to divide a
          problem into fewer or smaller subproblems. That will affect the homogeneous
          solution and lower the overall running time.

             If the driving function exceeds the homogeneous solution, then one must try to
          decrease the driving function. For example, in the mergesort case, where a = b = 2,
          and d(n) = cn, we shall see that the particular solution is O(nlogn). However,
          reducing d(n) to a slightly sublinear function, say n0.9, will, as we shall see, make the
          particular solution less than linear as well and reduce the overall running time to
          O(n), which is the homogeneous solution. †


          Multiplicative Functions
          The particular solution in (9.16) is hard to evaluate, even if we know what d(n) is.
          However, for certain common functions d(n), we can solve (9.16) exactly, and there
          are others for which we can get a good upper bound. We say a function f on integers
          is multiplicative if f(xy) = f(x)f(y) for all positive integers x and y.

          Example 9.2. The multiplicative functions that are of greatest interest to us are of the
          form nα for any positive α. To prove f(n) = nα is multiplicative, we have only to
          observe that (xy)α = xαyα.

             Now if d(n) in (9.16) is multiplicative, then d(bk-j) = (d(b))k-j, and the particular
          solution of (9.16) is




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (11 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          There are three cases to consider, depending on whether a is greater than, less than,
          or equal to d(b).

               1. If a > d(b), then the formula (9.17) is O(ak), which we recall is nlogba, since k
                  = logbn. In this case, the particular and homogeneous solutions are the same,
                  and depend only on a and b, and not on the driving function d. Thus,
                  improvements in the running time must come from decreasing a or increasing
                  b; decreasing d(n) is of no help.
               2. If a < d(b), then (9.17) is O(d(b)k), or equivalently O(nlogbd(b)). In this case,
                  the particular solution exceeds the homogeneous, and we may also look to the
                  driving function d(n) as well as to a and b, for improvements. Note the
                  important special case where d(n) = nα. Then d(b) = bα, and logb(bα) = α.
                  Thus the particular solution is O(nα), or O(d(n)).
               3. If a = d(b), we must reconsider the calculation involved in (9.17), as our
                  formula for the sum of a geometric series is now inappropriate. In this case
                  we have




          Since a = d(b), the particular solution given by (9.18) is logbn times the
          homogeneous solution, and again the particular solution exceeds the homogeneous.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (12 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          In the special case d(n) = nα, (9.18) reduces to O(nαlogn), by observations similar to
          those in Case (2).

          Example 9.3. Consider the following recurrences, with T(1) = 1.

               1. T(n) = 4T(n/2) + n
               2. T(n) = 4T(n/2) + n2
               3. T(n) = 4T(n/2) + n3

          In each case, a = 4, b = 2, and the homogeneous solution is n2. In Equation (1), with
          d(n) = n, we have d(b) = 2. Since a = 4 > d(b), the particular solution is also n2, and
          T(n) is O(n2) in (1).

             In Equation (3), d(n) = n3 d(b) = 8, and a < d(b). Thus the particular solution is
          O(nlogbd(b)) = O(n3), and T(n) of Equation (3) is O(n3). We can deduce that the
          particular solution is of the same order as d(n) = n3, using the observations made
          above about d(n)'s of the form nα in analyzing the case a < d(b) of (9.17). In
          Equation (2) we have d(b) = 4 = a, so (9.18) applies. As d(n) is of the form nα, the
          particular solution, and therefore T(n) itself, is O(n2 log n).


          Other Driving Functions
          These are other functions that are not multiplicative, yet for which we can get
          solutions for (9.16) or even (9.17). We shall consider two examples. The first
          generalizes to any function that is the product of a multiplicative function and a
          constant greater than or equal to one. The second is typical of a case where we must
          examine (9.16) in detail and get a close upper bound on the particular solution.

          Example 9.4. Consider


                 T(1) = 1

                 T(n) = 3T(n/2) + 2n1.5


          Now 2n1.5 is not multiplicative, but n1.5 is. Let U(n) = T(n)/2 for all n. Then


                 U(1) = 1/2



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (13 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




                 U(n) = 3U(n/2) + n1.5


          The homogeneous solution, if U(1) were 1, would be nlog 3 < n1.59; since U(1) = 1/2
          we can easily show the homogeneous solution is less than n1.59/2; certainly it is
          O(n1.59). For the particular solution, we can ignore the fact that U(1) ≠ 1, since
          increasing U(1) will surely not lower the particular solution. Then since a = 3, b = 2,
          and b1.5 = 2.83 < a, the particular solution is also O(n1.59), and that is the growth rate
          of U(n). Since T(n) = 2U(n), T(n) is also O(n1.59) or O(nlog 3).

          Example 9.5. Consider


                 T(1) = 1

                 T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n log n


          The homogeneous solution is easily seen to be n, since a = b = 2. However, d(n) = n
          log n is not multiplicative, and we must sum the particular solution formula in (9.16)
          by ad hoc means. That is, we want to evaluate




          Since k = log n we have the particular solution O (n log2n), and this solution, being
          greater than the homogeneous, is also the value of T(n) that we obtain.

          Exercises




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (14 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




                         Write recurrence equations for the time and space complexity of the
                         following algorithm, assuming n is a power of 2.


                              function path ( s, t, n: integer ) : boolean;
                                 begin
                                     if n = 1 then
                                        if edge (s, t) then
                                            return (true)
                                        else
                                            return (false);
                                     { if we reach here, n > 1 }
                 9.1
                                     for i := 1 to n do
                                        if path(s, i, n div 2) and
                         path (i, t, n div 2) then
                                            return (true);
                                     return (false)
                                 end; { path }


                         The function edge(i, j) returns true if vertices i and j of an n-vertex
                         graph are connected by an edge or if i = j; edge(i, j) returns false
                         otherwise. What does the program do?


                         Solve the following recurrences, where T(1) = 1 and T(n) for n ≥ 2
                         satisfies:

                                         a. T(n) = 3T(n/2) + n
                 9.2
                                         b. T(n) = 3T(n/2) + n2

                                         c. T(n) = 8T(n/2) + n3




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (15 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




                         Solve the following recurrences, where T(1) = 1 and T(n) for n ≥ 2
                         satisfies:

                                         a. T(n) = 4T(n/3) + n
                 9.3
                                         b. T(n) = 4T(n/3) + n2

                                         c. T(n) = 9T(n/3) + n2



                         Give tight big-oh and big-omega bounds on T(n) defined by the
                         following recurrences. Assume T(1) = 1.

                                         a. T(n) = T(n/2) + 1

                 9.4                     b. T(n) = 2T(n/2) + logn

                                         c. T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n

                                         d. T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n2


                         Solve the following recurrences by guessing a solution and checking
                         your answer.

                                         a. T(1) = 2
                *9.5                        T(n) = 2T(n-1) + 1 for n ≥ 2

                                         b. T(1) = 1
                                            T(n) = 2T(n-1) + n for n ≥ 2


                         Check your answers to Exercise 9.5 by solving the recurrences by
                 9.6
                         repeated substitution.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (16 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




                         Generalize Exercise 9.6 by solving all recurrences of the form


                             T(1) = 1
                 9.7         T(n) = aT(n-1) + d(n)            for n ≥ 1

                         in terms of a and d(n).


                     Suppose in Exercise 9.7 that d(n) = cn for some constant c ≥ 1. How
                *9.8 does the solution to T(n) depend on the relationship between a and c.
                     What is T(n)?

                         Solve for T(n):


              **9.9          T(1) = 1
                             T(n) = √nT(√n) + n              for n ≥ 2



                         Find closed form expressions for the following sums.



                9.10




                         Show that the number of different orders in which to multiply a
                         sequence of n matrices is given by the recurrence




              *9.11




                         Show that                               . The T(n)'s are called Catalan numbers.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (17 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




                         Show that the number of comparisons required to sort n elements using
                         mergesort is given by


                            T(1) = 0
                            T(n) = T([n/2]) + T([n/2]) + n - 1
            **9.12
                         where [x] denotes the integer part of x and [x] denotes the smallest
                         integer ≥ x. Show that the solution to this recurrence is


                            T(n) = n[logn] - 2[logn] + 1



                         Show that the number of Boolean functions of n variables is given by
                         the recurrence


                9.13        T(1) = 4
                            T(n) = (T(n - 1))2

                         Solve for T(n).


                         Show that the number of binary trees of height ≤ n is given by the
                         recurrence


            **9.14          T(1) = 1
                            T(n) = (T(n - 1))2 + 1

                         Show that T(n) = [k2n] for some constant k. What is the value of k?


          Bibliographic Notes
          Bentley, Haken, and Saxe [1978], Greene and Knuth [1983], Liu [1968], and Lueker
          [1980] contain additional material on the solution of recurrences. Aho and Sloane
          [1973] show that many nonlinear recurrences of the form T(n) = (T(n-1))2 + g(n)
          have a solution of the form T(n) = [k2n] where k is a constant, as in Exercise 9.14.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (18 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 9: Algorithm Analysis Techniques




          † But don't hold out much hope for discovering a way to merge two sorted lists of
          n/2 elements in less than linear time; we couldn't even look at all the elements on the
          list in that case.
                                  Table of Contents Go to Chapter 10




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1209.htm (19 of 19) [1.7.2001 19:24:52]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_3.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_3.gif [1.7.2001 19:25:12]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_4.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_4.gif [1.7.2001 19:25:24]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_6.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_6.gif [1.7.2001 19:25:37]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_8.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_8.gif [1.7.2001 19:25:51]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_9.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_9.gif [1.7.2001 19:26:07]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_12.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_12.gif [1.7.2001 19:26:12]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:26:17]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_19.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_19.gif [1.7.2001 19:26:22]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_21.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_21.gif [1.7.2001 19:26:31]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_23.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_23.gif [1.7.2001 19:26:42]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_24.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/fig8_24.gif [1.7.2001 19:26:48]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         Algorithm Design
         Techniques
         Over the years computer scientists have identified a number of general techniques
         that often yield effective algorithms in solving large classes of problems. This chapter
         presents some of the more important techniques, such as divide-and-conquer,
         dynamic programming, greedy techniques, backtracking, and local search. In trying
         to devise an algorithm to solve a given problem, it is often useful to ask a question
         such as "What kind of solution does divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, a
         greedy approach, or some other standard technique yield?"

              It should be emphasized, however, that there are problems, such as the NP-
         complete problems, for which these or any other known techniques will not produce
         efficient solutions. When such a problem is encountered, it is often useful to
         determine if the inputs to the problem have special characteristics that could be
         exploited in trying to devise a solution, or if an easily found approximate solution
         could be used in place of the difficult-to-compute exact solution.


         10.1 Divide-and-Conquer Algorithms
         Perhaps the most important, and most widely applicable, technique for designing
         efficient algorithms is a strategy called "divide-and-conquer." It consists of breaking
         a problem of size n into smaller problems in such a way that from solutions to the
         smaller problems we can easily construct a solution to the entire problem. We have
         already seen a number of applications of this technique, such as mergesort or binary
         search trees.

             To illustrate the method consider the familiar "towers of Hanoi" puzzle. It consists
         of three pegs A, B, and C. Initially peg A has on it some number of disks, starting
         with the largest one on the bottom and successively smaller ones on top, as shown in
         Fig. 10.1. The object of the puzzle is to move the disks one at a time from peg to peg,
         never placing a larger disk on top of a smaller one, eventually ending with all disks
         on peg B.

            One soon learns that the puzzle can be solved by the following simple algorithm.
         Imagine the pegs arranged in a triangle. On odd-numbered moves, move the smallest
         disk one peg clockwise. On even-numbered moves




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (1 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                                 Fig. 10.1. Initial position in towers of Hanoi puzzle.

         make the only legal move not involving the smallest disk.

             The above algorithm is concise, and correct, but it is hard to understand why it
         works, and hard to invent on the spur of the moment. Consider instead the following
         divide-and-conquer approach. The problem of moving the n smallest disks from A to
         B can be thought of as consisting of two subproblems of size n - 1. First move the n -
         1 smallest disks from peg A to peg C, exposing the nth smallest disk on peg A. Move
         that disk from A to B. Then move the n - 1 smallest disks from C to B. Moving the n-
         1 smallest disks is accomplished by a recursive application of the method. As the n
         disks involved in the moves are smaller than any other disks, we need not concern
         ourselves with what is below them on pegs A, B, or C. Although the actual movement
         of individual disks is not obvious, and hand simulation is hard because of the
         stacking of recursive calls, the algorithm is conceptually simple to understand, to
         prove correct and, we would like to think, to invent in the first place. It is probably
         the ease of discovery of divide-and-conquer algorithms that makes the technique so
         important, although in many cases the algorithms are also more efficient than more
         conventional ones.†


         The Problem of Multiplying Long Integers
         Consider the problem of multiplying two n-bit integers X and Y. Recall that the
         algorithm for multiplication of n-bit (or n-digit) integers usually taught in elementary
         school involves computing n partial products of size n and thus is an O(n2) algorithm,
         if we count single bit or digit multiplications and additions as one step. One divide-
         and-conquer approach to integer multiplication would break each of X and Y into two
         integers of n/2 bits each as shown in Fig. 10.2. (For simplicity we assume n is a
         power of 2 here.)




                                 Fig. 10.2. Breaking n-bit integers into                  -bit pieces.

              The product of X and Y can now be written



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (2 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




            XY = AC2n + (AD+BC) 2n/2 +
         BD       (10.1)

         If we evaluate XY in this straightforward way, we have to perform four
         multiplications of (n/2)-bit integers (AC, AD, BC, and BD), three additions of integers
         with at most 2n bits (corresponding to the three + signs in (10.1)), and two shifts
         (multiplication by 2n and 2n/2). As these additions and shifts take O(n) steps, we can
         write the following recurrence for T(n), the total number of bit operations needed to
         multiply n-bit integers according to (10.1).


                T(1) = 1
                T(n) = 4T(n/2) + cn                           (10.2)

         Using reasoning like that in Example 9.4, we can take the constant c in (10.2) to be 1,
         so the driving function d(n) is just n, and then deduce that the homogeneous and
         particular solutions are both O(n2).

             In the case that formula (10.1) is used to multiply integers, the asymptotic
         efficiency is thus no greater than for the elementary school method. But recall that for
         equations like (10.2) we get an asymptotic improvement if we decrease the number of
         subproblems. It may be a surprise that we can do so, but consider the following
         formula for multiplying X by Y.


            XY = AC2n + [(A - B)(D - C) +
         AC + BD]2n/2 + BD     (10.3)

         Although (10.3) looks more complicated than (10.1) it requires only three
         multiplications of (n/2)-bit integers, AC, BD, and (A - B)(D - C), six additions or
         subtractions, and two shifts. Since all but the multiplications take O(n) steps, the time
         T(n) to multiply n-bit integers by (10.3) is given by


               T(1) = 1
               T(n) = 3T(n/2) + cn

         whose solution is T(n) = O(nlog23) = O(n1.59).

              The complete algorithm, including the details implied by the fact that (10.3)



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (3 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         requires multiplication of negative, as well as positive, (n/2)-bit integers, is given in
         Fig. 10.3. Note that lines (8)-(11) are performed by copying bits, and the
         multiplication by 2n and 2n/2 in line (16) by shifting. Also, the multiplication by s in
         line (16) simply introduces the proper sign into the result.


               function mult ( X, Y, n: integer ): integer;
                 { X and Y are signed integers ≤
         2n.
               n is a power of 2. The function returns XY }
              var
                s: integer; { holds the sign of XY }
                m1, m2, m3: integer; { hold the three products }
                A, B, C, D: integer; { hold left and right halves of X and Y }
              begin
         (1)      s := sign(X) * sign(Y);
         (2)      X := abs(X);
         (3)      Y := abs(Y); { make X and Y positive }
         (4)      if n = 1 then
         (5)          if (X = 1) and (Y = 1) then
         (6)             return (s)
                     else
         (7)             return (0)
                 else begin
         (8)          A := left n/2 bits of X;
         (9)          B := right n/2 bits of X;
         (10)          C := left n/2 bits of Y;
         (11)          D := right n/2 bits of Y;
         (13)          m1 := mult(A, C, n/2);
         (14)          m2 := mult(A-B, D-C, n/2);
         (15)          m3 := mult(B, D, n/2);
         (16)          return (s * (m1*2n + (m1 +
         m2 + m3) * 2n/2 + m3))
                 end
              end; { mult }

                         Fig. 10.3. Divide-and-conquer integer multiplication algorithm.

            Observe that the divide-and-conquer algorithm of Fig. 10.3 is asymptotically
         faster than the method taught in elementary school, taking O(n1.59) steps against
         O(n2). We may thus raise the question: if this algorithm is so superior why don't we
         teach it in elementary school? There are two answers. First, while easy to implement



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (4 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         on a computer, the description of the algorithm is sufficiently complex that if we
         attempted to teach it in elementary school students would not learn to multiply.
         Furthermore, we have ignored constants of proportionality. While procedure mult of
         Fig. 10.3 is asymptotically superior to the usual method, the constants are such that
         for small problems (actually up to about 500 bits) the elementary school method is
         superior, and we rarely ask elementary school children to multiply such numbers.


         Constructing Tennis Tournaments
         The technique of divide-and-conquer has widespread applicability, not only in
         algorithm design but in designing circuits, constructing mathematical proofs and in
         other walks of life. We give one example as an illustration. Consider the design of a
         round robin tennis tournament schedule, for n = 2k players. Each player must play
         every other player, and each player must play one match per day for n -1 days, the
         minimum number of days needed to complete the tournament.

            The tournament schedule is thus an n row by n -1 column table whose entry in
         row i and column j is the player i must contend with on the jth day.

            The divide-and-conquer approach constructs a schedule for one- half of the
         players. This schedule is designed by a recursive application of the algorithm by
         finding a schedule for one half of these players and so on. When we get down to two
         players, we have the base case and we simply pair them up.

             Suppose there are eight players. The schedule for players 1 through 4 fills the
         upper left corner (4 rows by 3 columns) of the schedule being constructed. The lower
         left corner (4 rows by 3 columns) of the schedule must pit the high numbered players
         (5 through 8) against one another. This subschedule is obtained by adding 4 to each
         entry in the upper left.

            We have now simplified the problem. All that remains is to have lower-numbered
         players play high-numbered players. This is easily accomplished by having players 1
         through 4 play 5 through 8 respectively on day 4 and cyclically permuting 5 through
         8 on subsequent days. The process is illustrated in Fig. 10.4. The reader should now
         be able to generalize the ideas of this figure to provide a schedule for 2k players for
         any k.


         Balancing Subproblems
         In designing algorithms one is always faced with various trade-offs. One rule that has



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (5 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         emerged is that it is generally advantageous to balance competing costs wherever
         possible. For example in Chapter 5 we saw that the 2-3 tree balanced the costs of
         searching with those of inserting, while more straightforward methods take O(n)
         steps either for each lookup or for each insertion, even though the other operation can
         be done in a constant number of steps.

             Similarly, for divide-and-conquer algorithms, we are generally better off if the
         subproblems are of approximately equal size. For example, insertion sort can be
         viewed as partitioning a problem into two subproblems, one of size 1 and one of size
         n - 1, with a maximum cost of n steps to merge. This gives a recurrence


                   T(n) = T(1) + T(n - 1) + n

         which has an O(n2) solution. Mergesort, on the other hand, partitions the problems
         into two subproblems each of size n/2 and has O(nlogn) performance. As a general
         principle, we often find that partitioning a problem into




                               Fig. 10.4. A round-robin tournament for eight players.

         equal or nearly equal subproblems is a crucial factor in obtaining good performance.


         10.2 Dynamic Programming
         Often there is no way to divide a problem into a small number of subproblems whose
         solution can be combined to solve the original problem. In such cases we may
         attempt to divide the problem into as many subproblems as necessary, divide each
         subproblem into smaller subproblems and so on. If this is all we do, we shall likely
         wind up with an exponential-time algorithm.

            Frequently, however, there are only a polynomial number of subproblems, and
         thus we must be solving some subproblem many times. If instead we keep track of
         the solution to each subproblem solved, and simply look up the answer when needed,
         we would obtain a polynomial-time algorithm.

            It is sometimes simpler from an implementation point of view to create a table of
         the solutions to all the subproblems we might ever have to solve. We fill in the table



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (6 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         without regard to whether or not a particular subproblem is actually needed in the
         overall solution. The filling-in of a table of subproblems to get a solution to a given
         problem has been termed dynamic programming, a name that comes from control
         theory.

            The form of a dynamic programming algorithm may vary, but there is the
         common theme of a table to fill and an order in which the entries are to be filled. We
         shall illustrate the techniques by two examples, calculating odds on a match like the
         World Series, and the "triangulation problem."


         World Series Odds
         Suppose two teams, A and B, are playing a match to see who is the first to win n
         games for some particular n. The World Series is such a match, with n = 4. We may
         suppose that A and B are equally competent, so each has a 50% chance of winning
         any particular game. Let P(i, j) be the probability that if A needs i games to win, and
         B needs j games, that A will eventually win the match. For example, in the World
         Series, if the Dodgers have won two games and the Yankees one, then i = 2, j = 3,
         and P(2, 3), we shall discover, is 11/16.

             To compute P(i, j), we can use a recurrence equation in two variables. First, if i =
         0 and j > 0, then team A has won the match already, so P(0, j) = 1. Similarly, P(i, 0) =
         0 for i > 0. If i and j are both greater than 0, at least one more game must be played,
         and the two teams each win half the time. Thus, P(i, j) must be the average of P(i - 1,
         j) and P(i, j - 1), the first of these being the probability A will win the match if it wins
         the next game and the second being the probability A wins the match even though it
         loses the next game. To summarize:


            P(i, j) = 1 if i = 0 and j > 0
                  = 0 if i > 0 and j = 0
                  = (P(i - 1, j) + P(i, j - 1))/2 if i > 0 and
         j > 0 (10.4)

            If we use (10.4) recursively as a function, we can show that P(i, j) takes no more
         than time O(2i+j). Let T(n) be the maximum time taken by a call to P(i, j), where i + j
         = n. Then from (10.4),


                T(1) = c
                T(n) = 2T(n - 1) + d




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (7 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         for some constants c and d. The reader may check by the means discussed in the
         previous chapter that T(n) ≤ 2n- 1c + (2n-1-1)d, which is O(2n) or O(2i+j).

            We have thus proven an exponential upper bound on the time taken by the
         recursive computation of P(i, j). However, to convince ourselves that the recursive
         formula for P(i, j) is a bad way to compute it, we need to get a big-omega lower
         bound. We leave it as an exercise to show that when we call P(i, j), the total number

         of calls to P that gets made is                     , the number of ways to choose i things out of
         i+j. If i = j, that number is                        , where n = i+j. Thus, T(n) is                           , and
         in fact, we can show it is              also. While          grows asymptotically
         more slowly than 2n, the difference is not great, and T(n) grows far too fast for the
         recursive calculation of P(i, j) to be practical.

             The problem with the recursive calculation is that we wind up computing the same
         P(i, j) repeatedly. For example, if we want to compute P(2, 3), we compute, by
         (10.4), P(1, 3) and P(2, 2). P(1, 3) and P(2, 2) both require the computation of P(1,
         2), so we compute that value twice.

         A better way to compute P(i, j) is to fill in the table suggested by Fig. 10.5. The
         bottom row is all 0's and the rightmost column all 1's by the first two lines of (10.4).
         By the last line of (10.4), each other entry is the average of the entry below it and the
         entry to the right. Thus, an appropriate way to fill in the table is to proceed in
         diagonals beginning at the lower right corner, and proceeding up and to the left along
         diagonals representing entries with a constant value of i+j, as suggested in Fig. 10.6.
         This program is given in Fig. 10.7, assuming it works on a two-dimensional array P
         of suitable size.




                                                    Fig. 10.5. Table of odds.




                                              Fig. 10.6. Pattern of computation.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (8 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         The analysis of function odds is easy. The loop of lines (4)-(5) takes O(s) time, and
         that dominates the O(1) time for lines (2)-(3). Thus, the outer loop takes time

                               , where i+j = n. Thus dynamic


              function odds ( i, j: integer ): real;
                   var
                      s, k: integer;
                   begin
         (1)           for s := 1 to i + j do begin
                          { compute diagonal of entries whose indices sum to s }
         (2)               P[0, s] := 1.0;
         (3)               P[s, 0] := 0.0;
         (4)               for k := 1 to s-1 do
         (5)                   P[k, s-k] := (P[k-1, s-k]
         + P[k, s-k-1])/2.0
                      end;
         (6)           return (P[i, j])
                   end; { odds }

                                                  Fig. 10.7. Odds calculation.


         programming takes O(n2) time, compared with                                        for the straightforward
         approach. Since          grows wildly faster than n2, we would prefer dynamic
         programming to the recursive approach under essentially any circumstances.


         The Triangulation Problem
         As another example of dynamic programming, consider the problem of triangulating
         a polygon. We are given the vertices of a polygon and a distance measure between
         each pair of vertices. The distance may be the ordinary (Euclidean) distance in the
         plane, or it may be an arbitrary cost function given by a table. The problem is to
         select a set of chords (lines between nonadjacent vertices) such that no two chords
         cross each other, and the entire polygon is divided into triangles. The total length
         (distance between endpoints) of the chords selected must be a minimum. We call
         such a set of chords a minimal triangulation.

         Example 10.1. Figure 10.8 shows a seven-sided polygon and the (x, y) coordinates of
         its vertices. The distance function is the ordinary Euclidean distance. A triangulation,



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (9 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         which happens not to be minimal, is shown by dashed lines. Its cost is the sum of the
         lengths of the chords (v0, v2), (v0, v3), (v0, v5), and (v3, v5), or
                                                                                       .

             As well as being interesting in its own right, the triangulation problem has a
         number of useful applications. For example, Fuchs, Kedem, and Uselton [1977] used
         a generalization of the triangulation problem for the following purpose. Consider the
         problem of shading a two-dimensional picture of an object whose surface is defined
         by a collection of points in 3-space. The light source comes from a given direction,
         and the brightness of a point on the surface depends on the angles between the
         direction of light, the direction of the viewer's eye, and a perpendicular to the surface
         at that point. To estimate the direction of the surface at a point, we can compute a
         minimum triangulation




                                        Fig. 10.8. A heptagon and a triangulation.

         of the points defining the surface.

             Each triangle defines a plane in a 3-space, and since a minimum triangulation was
         found, the triangles are expected to be very small. It is easy to find the direction of a
         perpendicular to a plane, so we can compute the light intensity for the points of each
         triangle, on the assumption that the surface can be treated as a triangular plane in a
         given region. If the triangles are not sufficiently small to make the light intensity look
         smooth, then local averaging can improve the picture.

         Before proceeding with the dynamic programming solution to the triangulation
         problem, let us state two observations about triangulations that will help us design the
         algorithm. Throughout we assume we have a polygon with n vertices v0, v1, . . . , vn-1,
         in clockwise order.

         Fact 1. In any triangulation of a polygon with more than three vertices, every pair of
         adjacent vertices is touched by at least one chord. To see this, suppose neither vi nor
         vi+1† were touched by a chord. Then the region that edge (vi, vi+1) bounds would
         have to include edges (vi-1, vi), (vi+1, Vi+2) and at least one additional edge. This
         region then would not be a triangle.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (10 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         Fact 2. If (vi, vj) is a chord in a triangulation, then there must be some vk such that (vi,
         vk) and (vk, vj) are each either edges of the polygon or chords. Otherwise, (vi, vj)
         would bound a region that was not a triangle.

             To begin searching for a minimum triangulation, we pick two adjacent vertices,
         say v0 and v1. By the two facts we know that in any triangulation, and therefore in the
         minimum triangulation, there must be a vertex vk such that (v1, vk) and (vk, v0) are
         chords or edges in the triangulation. We must therefore consider how good a
         triangulation we can find after selecting each possible value for k. If the polygon has
         n vertices, there are a total of (n-2) choices to make.

             Each choice of k leads to at most two subproblems, which we define to be
         polygons formed by one chord and the edges in the original polygon from one end of
         the chord to the other. For example, Fig. 10.9 shows the two subproblems that result
         if we select the vertex v3.




                                  Fig. 10.9. The two subproblems after selecting v3.

            Next, we must find minimum triangulations for the polygons of Fig. 10.9(a) and
         (b). Our first instinct is that we must again consider all chords emanating from two
         adjacent vertices. For example, in solving Fig. 10.9(b), we might consider choosing
         chord (v3, v5), which leaves subproblem (v0, v3, v5, v6), a polygon two of whose
         sides, (v0, v3) and (v3, v5), are chords of the original polygon. This approach leads to
         an exponential-time algorithm.

             However, by considering the triangle that involves the chord (v0, vk) we never
         have to consider polygons more than one of whose sides are chords of the original
         polygon. Fact 2 tells us that, in the minimal triangulation, thechord in the
         subproblem, such as (v0, v3) in Fig. 10.9(b), must make a triangle with one of the
         other vertices. For example, if we select v4, we get the triangle (v0, v3, v4) and the
         subproblem (v0, v4, v5, v6) which has only one chord of the original polygon. If we
         try v5, we get the subproblems (v3, v4, v5) and (v0, v5, v6), with chords (v3, v5) and
         (v0, v5) only.

              In general, define the subproblem of size s beginning at vertex vi, denoted Sis, to



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (11 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         be the minimal triangulation problem for the polygon formed by the s vertices
         beginning at vi and proceeding clockwise, that is, vi, vi+1, ..., vi+s-1. The chord in Sis is
         (vi, vi+s-1). For example, Fig. 10.9(a) is S04 and Fig. 10.9(b) is S35. To solve Sis we
         must consider the following three options.

               1. We may pick vertex vi+s-2 to make a triangle with the chords (vi, vi+s-1) and
                  (vi, vi+s-2) and third side (vi+s-2, vi+s-l), and then solve the subproblem Si,s-1.
               2. We may pick vertex vi+1 to make a triangle with the chords (vi, vi+s-1) and
                  (vi+1, vi+s-1) and third side (vi, vi+1), and then solve the subproblem Si + 1,s-1.
               3. For some k between 2 and s-3 we may pick vertex vi+k and form a triangle
                  with sides (vi, vi+k), (vi+k, vi+s-1), and (vi, vi+s-1) and then solve subproblems
                  Si,k+1 and Si+k,s-k.

            If we remember that "solving" any subproblem of size three or less requires no
         action, we can summarize (1)-(3) by saying that we pick some k between 1 and s-2
         and solve subproblems Si,k+1 and Si+k,s-k. Figure 10.10 illustrates this division into
         subproblems.




                                      Fig. 10.10. Division of Sis into subproblems.

            If we use the obvious recursive algorithm implied by the above rules to solve
         subproblems of size four or more, then it is possible to show that each call on a
         subproblem of size s gives rise to a total of 3s-4 recursive calls, if we "solve"
         subproblems of size three or less directly and count only calls on subproblems of size
         four or more. Thus the number of subproblems to be solved is exponential in s. Since
         our initial problem is of size n, where n is the number of vertices in the given
         polygon, the total number of steps performed by this recursive procedure is
         exponential in n.

            Yet something is clearly wrong in this analysis, because we know that besides the
         original problem, there are only n(n-4) different subproblems that ever need to be
         solved. They are represented by Sis, where 0 ≤ i < n and 4 ≤ s < n. Evidently not all
         the subproblems solved by the recursive procedure are different. For example, if in
         Fig. 10.8 we choose chord (v0, v3), and then in the subproblem of Fig. 10.9(b) we
         pick v4, we have to solve subproblem S44. But we would also have to solve this



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (12 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         problem if we first picked chord (v0, v4), or if we picked (v1, v4) and then, when
         solving subproblem S45, picked vertex v0 to complete a triangle with v1 and v4.

            This suggests an efficient way to solve the triangulation problem. We make a table
         giving the cost Cis of triangulating Sis for all i and s. Since the solution to any given
         problem depends only on the solution to problems of smaller size, the logical order in
         which to fill in the table is in size order. That is, for sizes s = 4, 5, . . . ,n-1 we fill in
         the minimum cost for problems Sis, for all vertices i. It is convenient to include
         problems of size 0 ≤ s < 4 as well, but remember that Sis has cost 0 if s < 4.

            By rules (1)-(3) above for finding subproblems, the formula for computing Cis for
         s ≥ 4 is:




         where D(vp, vq) is the length of the chord between vertices vp and vq, if vp and vq are
         not adjacent points on the polygon; D(vp, vq) is 0 if vp and vq are adjacent.

         Example 10.2. Figure 10.11 holds the table of costs for Si,s for 0 ≤ i ≤ 6 and 4 ≤ s ≤
         6, based on the polygon and distances of Fig. 10.8. The costs for the rows with s < 3
         are all zero. We have filled in the entry C07, in column 0 and the row for s = 7. This
         entry, like all in that row, represents the triangulation of the entire polygon. To see
         that, just notice that we can, if we wish, consider the edge (v0, v6) to be a chord of a
         larger polygon and the polygon of Fig. 10.8 to be a subproblem of this polygon,
         which has a series of additional vertices extending clockwise from v6 to v0. Note that
         the entire row for s = 7 has the same value as C07, to within the accuracy of the
         computation.

             Let us, as an example, show how the entry 38.09 in the column for i = 6 and row
         for s = 5 is filled in. According to (10.5) the value of this entry, C65, is the minimum
         of three sums, corresponding to k = 1, 2, or 3. These sums are:


                  C62 + C04 + D
         (v6, v0) + D(v0,
         v3)
                  C63 + C13 + D




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (13 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         (v6, v1) + D(v1,
         v3)
                  C64 + C22 + D
         (v6, v2) + D(v2,
         v3)




                                                    Fig. 10.11 Table of Cis's.

         The distances we need are calculated from the coordinates of the vertices as:


                D(v2, v3) =
         D(v6, v0) = 0

         (since these are polygon edges, not chords, and are present "for free")


                   D(v6, v2) = 26.08
                   D(v1, v3) = 16.16
                   D(v6, v1) = 22.36
                   D(v0, v3) = 21.93

            The three sums above are 38.09, 38.52, and 43.97, respectively. We may conclude
         that the minimum cost of the subproblem S65 is 38.09. Moreover, since the first sum
         was smallest, we know that to achieve this minimum we must utilize the subproblems
         S62 and S04, that is, select chord (v0, v3) and then solve S64 as best we can; chord (v1,
         v3) is the preferred choice for that subproblem.

             There is a useful trick for filling out the table of Fig. 10.11 according to the
         formula (10.5). Each term of the min operation in (10.5) requires a pair of entries.
         The first pair, for k = 1, can be found in the table (a) at the "bottom" (the row for s =
         2)† of the column of the element being computed, and (b) just below and to the right‡
         of the element being computed. The second pair is (a) next to the bottom of the
         column, and (b) two positions down and to the right. Fig. 10.12 shows the two lines
         of entries we follow to get all the pairs of entries we need to consider simultaneously.
         The pattern -- up the column and down the diagonal -- is a common one in filling



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (14 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         tables during dynamic programming.




                             Fig. 10.12. Pattern of table scan to compute one element.


         Finding Solutions from the Table
         While Fig. 10.11 gives us the cost of the minimum triangulation, it does not
         immediately give us the triangulation itself. What we need, for each entry, is the
         value of k that produced the minimum in (10.5). Then we can deduce that the solution
         consists of chords (vi, vi+k), and (vi+k, vi+s-1) (unless one of them is not a chord,
         because k = 1 or k = s-2), plus whatever chords are implied by the solutions to Si,k+1
         and Si+k,s-k. It is useful, when we compute an element of the table, to include with it
         the value of k that gave the best solution.

         Example 10.3. In Fig. 10.11, the entry C07, which represents the solution to the
         entire problem of Fig. 10.8, comes from the terms for k = 5 in (10.5). That is, the
         problem S07 is split into S06 and S52; the former is the problem with six vertices v0,
         v1, . . . ,v5, and the latter is a trivial "problem" of cost 0. Thus we introduce the chord
         (v0, v5) of cost 22.09 and must solve S06.

             The minimum cost for C06 comes from the terms for k = 2 in (10.5), whereby the
         problem S06 is split into S03 and S24. The former is the triangle with vertices v0, v1,
         and v2, while the latter is the quadrilateral defined by v2, v3, v4, and v5. S03 need not
         be solved, but S24 must be, and we must include the costs of chords (v0, v2) and (v2,
         v5) which are 17.89 and 19.80, respectively. We find the minimum value for C24 is
         assumed when k = 1 in (10.5), giving us the subproblems C22 and C33, both of which
         have size less than or equal to three and therefore cost 0. The chord (v3, v5) is
         introduced, with a cost of 15.65.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (15 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                                         Fig. 10.13. A minimal cost triangulation.


         10.3 Greedy Algorithms
         Consider the problem of making change. Assume coins of values 25¢ (quarter), 10¢
         (dime), 5¢ (nickel) and 1¢ (penny), and suppose we want to return 63¢ in change.
         Almost without thinking we convert this amount to two quarters, one dime and three
         pennies. Not only were we able to determine quickly a list of coins with the correct
         value, but we produced the shortest list of coins with that value.

            The algorithm the reader probably used was to select the largest coin whose value
         was not greater than 63¢ (a quarter), add it to the list and subtract its value from 63
         getting 38¢. We then selected the largest coin whose value was not greater than 38¢
         (another quarter) and added it to the list, and so on.

            This method of making change is a greedy algorithm. At any individual stage a
         greedy algorithm selects that option which is "locally optimal" in some particular
         sense. Note that the greedy algorithm for making change produces an overall optimal
         solution only because of special properties of the coins. If the coins had values 1¢,
         5¢, and 11¢ and we were to make change of 15¢, the greedy algorithm would first
         select an 11¢ coin and then four 1¢ coins, for a total of five coins. However, three 5¢
         coins would suffice.

            We have already seen several greedy algorithms, such as Dijkstra's shortest path
         algorithm and Kruskal's minimum cost spanning tree algorithm. Dijkstra's shortest
         path algorithm is "greedy" in the sense that it always chooses the closest vertex to the
         source among those whose shortest path is not yet known. Kruskal's algorithm is also
         "greedy"; it picks from the remaining edges the shortest among those that do not
         create a cycle.

             We should emphasize that not every greedy approach succeeds in producing the
         best result overall. Just as in life, a greedy strategy may produce a good result for a
         while, yet the overall result may be poor. As an example, we might consider what
         happens when we allow negative-weight edges in Dijkstra's and Kruskal's algorithms.
         It turns out that Kruskal's spanning tree algorithm is not affected; it still produces the
         minimum cost tree. But Dijkstra's algorithm fails to produce shortest paths in some
         cases.

         Example 10.4. We see in Fig. 10.14 a graph with a negative cost edge between b and
         c. If we apply Dijkstra's algorithm with source s, we correctly discover first that the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (16 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         minimum path to a has length 1. Now, considering only edges from s or a to b or c,
         we expect that b has the shortest path from s, namely s → a → b, of length 3. We
         then discover that c has a shortest path from s of length 1.




                                      Fig. 10.14. Graph with negative weight edge.

            However, our "greedy" selection of b before c was wrong from a global point of
         view. It turns out that the path s → a → c → b has length only 2, so our minimum
         distance of 3 for b was wrong.†


         Greedy Algorithms as Heuristics
         For some problems no known greedy algorithm produces an optimal solution, yet
         there are greedy algorithms that can be relied upon to produce "good" solutions with
         high probability. Frequently, a suboptimal solution with a cost a few percent above
         optimal is quite satisfactory. In these cases, a greedy algorithm often provides the
         fastest way to get a "good" solution. In fact, if the problem is such that the only way
         to get an optimal solution is to use an exhaustive search technique, then a greedy
         algorithm or other heuristic for getting a good, but not necessarily optimal, solution
         may be our only real choice.

         Example 10.5. Let us introduce a famous problem where the only known algorithms
         that produce optimal solutions are of the "try-all-possibilities" variety and can have
         running times that are exponential in the size of the input. The problem, called the
         traveling salesman problem, or TSP, is to find, in an undirected graph with weights
         on the edges, a tour (a simple cycle that includes all the vertices) the sum of whose
         edge-weights is a minimum. A tour is often called a Hamilton (or Hamiltonian) cycle.

            Figure 10.15(a) shows one instance of the traveling salesman problem, a graph
         with six vertices (often called "cities"). The coordinates of each vertex are given, and
         we take the weight of each edge to be its length. Note that, as is conventional with the
         TSP, we assume all edges exist, that is, the graph is complete. In more general
         instances, where the weight of edges is not based on Euclidean distance, we might
         find a weight of infinity on an edge that really was not present.

           Figure 10.15(b)-(e) shows four tours of the six "cities" of Fig. 10.15(a). The reader
         might ponder which of these four, if any, is optimal. The lengths of these four tours



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (17 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         are 50.00, 49.73, 48.39, and 49.78, respectively; (d) is the shortest of all possible
         tours.




                            Fig. 10.15. An instance of the traveling salesman problem.

         The TSP has a number of practical applications. As its name implies, it can be used
         to route a person who must visit a number of points and return to his starting point.
         For example, the TSP has been used to route collectors of coins from pay phones.
         The vertices are the phones and the "home base." The cost of each edge is the travel
         time between the two points in question.

             Another "application" of the TSP is in solving the knight's tour problem: find a
         sequence of moves whereby a knight can visit each square of the chessboard exactly
         once and return to its starting point. Let the vertices be the chessboard squares and let
         the edges between two squares that are a knight's move apart have weight 0; all other
         edges have weight infinity. An optimal tour has weight 0 and must be a knight's tour.
         Surprisingly, good heuristics for the TSP have no trouble finding knight's tours,
         although finding one "by hand" is a challenge.

             The greedy algorithm for the TSP we have in mind is a variant of Kruskal's
         algorithm. Like that algorithm, we shall consider edges shortest first. In Kruskal's
         algorithm we accept an edge in its turn if it does not form a cycle with the edges
         already accepted, and we reject the edge otherwise. For the TSP, the acceptance
         criterion is that an edge under consideration, together with already selected edges,

               1. does not cause a vertex to have degree three or more, and
               2. does not form a cycle, unless the number of selected edges equals the number
                  of vertices in the problem.

            Collections of edges selected under these criteria will form a collection of
         unconnected paths, until the last step, when the single remaining path is closed to
         form a tour.

             In Fig. 10.15(a), we would first pick edge (d, e), since it is the shortest, having
         length 3. Then we consider edges (b, c), (a, b), and (e, f), all of which have length 5.
         It doesn't matter in which order we consider them; all meet the conditions for
         selection, and we must select them if we are to follow the greedy approach. Next



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (18 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         shortest edge is (a, c), with length 7.08. However, this edge would form a cycle with
         (a, b) and (b, c), so we reject it. Edge (d, f) is next rejected on similar grounds. Edge
         (b, e) is next to be considered, but it must be rejected because it would raise the
         degrees of b and e to three, and could then never form a tour with what we had
         selected. Similarly we reject (b, d). Next considered is (c, d), which is accepted. We
         now have one path, a → b → c → d → e → f, and eventually accept (a, f) to
         complete the tour. The resulting tour is Fig. 10.15(b), which is fourth best of all the
         tours, but less than 4% more costly than the optimal.


         10.4 Backtracking
         Sometimes we are faced with the task of finding an optimal solution to a problem, yet
         there appears to be no applicable theory to help us find the optimum, except by
         resorting to exhaustive search. We shall devote this section to a systematic,
         exhaustive searching technique called backtracking and a technique called alpha-beta
         pruning, which frequently reduces the search substantially.

            Consider a game such as chess, checkers, or tic-tac-toe, where there are two
         players. The players alternate moves, and the state of the game can be represented by
         a board position. Let us assume that there are a finite number of board positions and
         that the game has some sort of stopping rule to ensure termination. With each such
         game, we can associate a tree called the game tree. Each node of the tree represents a
         board position. With the root we associate the starting position. If board position x is
         associated with node n, then the children of n correspond to the set of allowable
         moves from board position x, and with each child is associated the resulting board
         position. For example, Fig. 10.16 shows part of the tree for tic-tac-toe.




                                       Fig. 10.16. Part of the tic-tac-toe game tree.

            The leaves of the tree correspond to board positions where there is no move, either
         because one of the players has won or because all squares are filled and a draw
         resulted. We associate a value with each node of the tree.

         First we assign values to the leaves. Say the game is tic-tac-toe. Then a leaf is
         assigned -l, 0 or 1 depending on whether the board position corresponds to a loss,
         draw or win for player 1 (playing X).



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (19 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




             The values are propagated up the tree according to the following rule. If a node
         corresponds to a board position where it is player 1's move, then the value is the
         maximum of the values of the children of that node. That is, we assume player 1 will
         make the move most favorable to himself i.e., that which produces the highest-valued
         outcome. If the node corresponds to player 2's move, then the value is the minimum
         of the values of the children. That is, we assume player 2 will make his most
         favorable move, producing a loss for player 1 if possible, and a draw as next
         preference.

         Example 10.6. The values of the boards have been marked in Fig. 10.16. The leaves
         that are wins for O get value -1, while those that are draws get 0, and wins for X get +
         1. Then we proceed up the tree. On level 8, where only one empty square remains,
         and it is X's move, the values for the unresolved boards is the "maximum" of the one
         child at level 9.

            On level 7, where it is O's move and there are two choices, we take as a value for
         an interior node the minimum of the values of its children. The leftmost board shown
         on level 7 is a leaf and has value 1, because it is a win for X. The second board on
         level 7 has value min(0, -1) = -1, while the third board has value min(0, l) = 0. The
         one board shown at level 6, it being X's move on that level, has value max(l, -1, 0) =
         1, meaning that there is some choice X can make that will win; in this case the win is
         immediate.

             Note that if the root has value 1, then player 1 has a winning strategy. Whenever it
         is his turn he is guaranteed that he can select a move that leads to a board position of
         value 1. Whenever it is player 2's move he has no real choice but to select a moving
         leading to a board position of value 1, a loss for him. The fact that a game is assumed
         to terminate guarantees an eventual win for the first player. If the root has value 0, as
         it does in tic-tac-toe, then neither player has a winning strategy but can only
         guarantee himself a draw by playing as well as possible. If the root has value -1, then
         player 2 has a winning strategy.


         Payoff Functions
         The idea of a game tree, where nodes have values -1, 0, and l, can be generalized to
         trees where leaves are given any number (called the payoff) as a value, and the same
         rules for evaluating interior nodes applies: take the maximum of the children on those
         levels where player 1 is to move, and the minimum of the children on levels where
         player 2 moves.

              As an example where general payoffs are useful, consider a complex game, like


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (20 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         chess, where the game tree, though finite, is so huge that evaluating it from the
         bottom up is not feasible. Chess programs work, in essence, by building for each
         board position from which it must move, the game tree with that board as root,
         extending downward for several levels; the exact number of levels depends on the
         speed with which the computer can work. As most of the leaves of the tree will be
         ambiguous, neither wins, losses, nor draws, each program uses a function of board
         positions that attempts to estimate the probability of the computer winning in that
         position. For example, the difference in material figures heavily into such an
         estimation, as do such factors as the defensive strength around the kings. By using
         this payoff function, the computer can estimate the probability of a win after making
         each of its possible next moves, on the assumption of subsequent best play by each
         side, and chose the move with the highest payoff.†


         Implementing Backtrack Search
         Suppose we are given the rules for a game,† that is, its legal moves and rules for
         termination. We wish to construct its game tree and evaluate the root. We could
         construct the tree in the obvious way, and then visit the nodes in postorder. The
         postorder traversal assures that we visit an interior node n after all its children,
         whereupon we can evaluate n by taking the min or max of the values of its children,
         as appropriate.

             The space to store the tree can be prohibitively large, but by being careful we need
         never store more than one path, from the root to some node, at any one time. In Fig.
         10.17 we see the sketch of a recursive program that represents the path in the tree by
         the sequence of active procedure calls at any time. That program assumes the
         following:

               1. Payoffs are real numbers in a limited range, for example - 1 to + 1.
               2. The constant ∞ is larger than any positive payoff and its negation is smaller
                  than any negative payoff.
               3. The type modetype is declared


                               type
                                  modetype = (MIN, MAX)

               4. There is a type boardtype declared in some manner suitable for the
                  representation of board positions.
               5. There is a function payoff that computes the payoff for any board that is a leaf
                  (i.e., won, lost, or drawn position).



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (21 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




             function search ( B: boardtype; mode: modetype ): real;
               { evaluates the payoff for board B, assuming it is
                player 1's move if mode = MAX and player 2's move
                  if mode = MIN. Returns the payoff }
               var
                   C: boardtype; { a child of board B }
                   value: real; { temporary minimum or maximum value }
                begin
         (1)        if B is a leaf then
         (2)             return (payoff(B))
                     else begin
                         { initialize minimum or maximum value of children }
         (3)            if mode = MAX then
         (4)               value := -∞
                        else
         (5)               value := ∞;
         (6)            for each child C of board B do
         (7)               if mode = MAX then
         (8)                  value := max(value, search(C, MIN))
                            else
         (9)                  value := min(value, search(C, MAX));
         (10)             return (value)
               end
             end; { search }

                                   Fig. 10.17. Recursive backtrack search program.

            Another implementation we might consider is to use a nonrecursive program that
         keeps a stack of boards corresponding to the sequence of active calls to search. The
         techniques discussed in Section 2.6 can be used to construct such a program.


         Alpha-Beta Pruning
         There is a simple observation that allows us to eliminate from consideration much of
         a typical game tree. In terms of Fig. 10.17, the for-loop of line (6) can skip over
         certain children, often many of the children. Suppose we have a node n, as in Fig.
         10.18, and we have already determined that c1, the first of n's children, has a value of
         20. As n is a max node, we know its value is at least 20. Now suppose that continuing
         with our search we find that d, a child of c2 has value 15. As c2, another child of n, is



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (22 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         a min node, we know the value of c2 cannot exceed 15. Thus, whatever value c2 has,
         it cannot affect the value of n or any parent of n.

            It is thus possible in the situation of Fig. 10.18, to skip consideration of the
         children of c2 that we have not already examined. The general rules for




                                        Fig. 10.18. Pruning the children of a node.

         skipping or "pruning" nodes involves the notion of final and tentative values for
         nodes. The final value is what we have simply been calling the "value." A tentative
         value is an upper bound on the value of a min node, or a lower bound on the value of
         a max node. The rules for computing final and tentative values are the following.

               1. If all the children of a node n have been considered or pruned, make the
                  tentative value of n final.
               2. If a max node n has tentative value v1 and a child with final value v2, then set
                  the tentative value of n to max(v1, v2). If n is a min node, set its tentative value
                  to min(v1, v2).
               3. If p is a min node with parent q (a max node), and p and q have tentative
                  values v1 and v2, respectively, with v1 ≤ v2, then we may prune all the
                  unconsidered children of p. We may also prune the unconsidered children of p
                  if p is a max node (and therefore q is a min node) and v2 ≤ v1.

         Example 10.7. Consider the tree in Fig. 10.19. Assuming values for the leaves as
         shown, we wish to calculate the value for the root. We begin a postorder traversal.
         After reaching node D, by rule (2) we assign a tentative value of 2, which is the final
         value of D, to node C. We then search E and return to C and then to B. By rule (1),
         the final value of C is fixed at 2 and the value of B is tentatively set to 2. The search
         continues down to G and then back to F. The value F is tentatively set to 6. By rule
         (3), with p and q equal to F and B, respectively, we may prune H. That is, there is no
         need to search node H, since the tentative value of F can never decrease and it is
         already greater than the value of B, which can never increase.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (23 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                                                    Fig. 10.19. A game tree.

            Continuing our example, A is assigned a tentative value of 2 and the search
         proceeds to K. J is assigned a tentative value of 8. L does not determine the value of
         max node J. I is assigned a tentative value of 8. The search goes down to N, and M is
         assigned a tentative value of 5. Node O must be searched, since 5, the tentative value
         of M, is less than the tentative value of I. The tentative values of I and A are revised,
         and the search goes down to R. Eventually R and S are searched, and P is assigned a
         tentative value of 4. We need not search T or below, since that can only lower P's
         value and it is already too low to affect the value of A.


         Branch-and-Bound Search
         Games are not the only sorts of "problems" that can be solved exhaustively by
         searching a complete tree of possibilities. A wide variety of problems where we are
         asked to find a minimum or maximum configuration of some sort are amenable to
         solution by backtracking search over a tree of all possibilities. The nodes of the tree
         can be thought of as sets of configurations, and the children of a node n each
         represent a subset of the configurations that n represents. Finally, the leaves each
         represent single configurations, or solutions to the problem, and we may evaluate
         each such configuration to see if it is the best solution found so far.

            If we are reasonably clever in how we design the search, the children of a node
         will each represent far fewer configurations than the node itself, so we need not go to
         too great a depth before reaching leaves. Lest this notion of searching appear too
         vague, let us take a concrete example.

         Example 10.8. Recall from the previous section our discussion of the traveling
         salesman problem. There we gave a "greedy algorithm" for finding a good but not
         necessarily optimum tour. Now let us consider how we might find the optimum tour
         by systematically considering all tours. One way is to consider all permutations of the
         nodes, and evaluate the tour that visits the nodes in that order, remembering the best
         found so far. The time for such an approach is O(n!) on an n node graph, since we
         must consider (n--1)! different permutations,† and each permutation takes O(n) time
         to evaluate.

             We shall consider a somewhat different approach that is no better than the above
         in the worst case, but on the average, when coupled with a technique called "branch-
         and-bound" that we shall discuss shortly, produces the answer far more rapidly than
         the "try all permutations" method. Start constructing a tree, with a root that represents
         all tours. Tours are what we called "configurations" in the prefatory material. Each



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (24 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         node has two children, and the tours that a node represents are divided by these
         children into two groups -- those that have a particular edge and those that do not. For
         example, Fig. 10.20 shows portions of the tree for the TSP instance from Fig.
         10.15(a).

             In Fig. 10.20 we have chosen to consider the edges in lexicographic order (a, b),
         (a, c), . . . ,(a, f), (b, c), . . . ,(b, f), (c, d), and so on. We could, of course pick any
         other order. Observe that not every node in the tree has two children. We can
         eliminate some children because the edges selected do not form part of a tour. Thus,
         there is no node for "tours containing (a, b), (a, c), and (a, d)," because a would have
         degree 3 and the result would not be a tour. Similarly, as we go down the tree we
         shall eliminate some nodes because some city would have degree less than 2. For
         example, we shall find no node for tours without (a, b), (a, c), (a, d), or (a, e).


         Bounding Heuristics Needed for Branch-
         and-Bound
         Using ideas similar to those in alpha-beta pruning, we can eliminate far more nodes
         of the search tree than would be suggested by Example 10.8. Suppose, to be specific,
         that our problem is to minimize some function, e.g., the cost of a tour in the TSP.
         Suppose also that we have a method for getting a lower bound on the cost of any
         solution among those in the set of solutions represented by some node n. If the best
         solution found so far costs less than the lower bound for node n, we need not explore
         any of the nodes below n.

         Example 10.9. We shall discuss one way to get a lower bound on certain sets of
         solutions for the TSP, those sets represented by nodes in a tree of solutions as
         suggested in Fig. 10.20. First of all, suppose we wish a lower bound on all solutions
         to a given instance of the TSP. Observe that the cost of any tour can be expressed as
         one half the sum over all nodes n of the cost of the two tour edges adjacent to n. This
         remark leads to the following rule. The sum




                            Fig. 10.20. Beginning of a solution tree for a TSP instance.

         of the two tour edges adjacent to node n is no less than the sum of the two edges of



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (25 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         least cost adjacent to n. Thus, no tour can cost less than one half the sum over all
         nodes n of the two lowest cost edges incident upon n.

         For example, consider the TSP instance in Fig. 10.21. Unlike the instance in Fig.
         10.15, the distance measure for edges is not Euclidean; that is, it bears no relation to
         the distance in the plane between the cities it connects. Such a cost measure might be
         traveling time or fare, for example. In this instance, the least cost edges adjacent to
         node a are (a, d), and (a, b), with a total cost of 5. For node b, we have (a, b) and (b,
         e), with a total cost of 6. Similarly, the two lowest cost edges adjacent to c, d, and e,
         total 8, 7, and 9, respectively. Our lower bound on the cost of a tour is thus
         (5+6+8+7+9)/2 = 17.5.




                                               Fig. 10.21. An instance of TSP.

         Now suppose we want a lower bound on the cost of a subset of tours defined by some
         node in the search tree. If the search tree is constructed as in Example 10.8, each
         node represents tours defined by a set of edges that must be in the tour and a set of
         edges that may not be in the tour. These constraints alter our choices for the two
         lowest-cost edges at each node. Obviously an edge constrained to be in any tour must
         be included among the two edges selected, no matter whether they are or are not
         lowest or second lowest in cost.† Similarly, an edge constrained to be out cannot be
         selected, even if its cost is lowest.

         Thus, if we are constrained to include edge (a, e), and exclude (b, c), the two edges
         for node a are (a, d) and (a e), with a total cost of 9. For b we select (a b) and (b, e),
         as before, with a total cost of 6. For c, we cannot select (b, c), and so select (a, c) and
         (c, d), with a total cost of 9. For d we select (a, d) and (c, d), as before, while for e we
         must select (a, e), and choose to select (b, e). The lower bound for these constraints is
         thus (9+6+9+7+10)/2 = 20.5.

         Now let us construct the search tree along the lines suggested in Example 10.8. We
         consider the edges in lexicographic order, as in that example. Each time we branch,
         by considering the two children of a node, we try to infer additional decisions
         regarding which edges must be included or excluded from tours represented by those
         nodes. The rules we use for these inference are:

               1. If excluding an edge (x, y) would make it impossible for x or y to have as



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (26 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                   many as two adjacent edges in the tour, then (x, y) must be included.

               2. If including (x, y) would cause x or y to have more than two edges adjacent in
                  the tour, or would complete a non-tour cycle with edges already included, then
                  (x, y) must be excluded.

         When we branch, after making what inferences we can, we compute lower bounds
         for both children. If the lower bound for a child is as high or higher than the lowest
         cost tour found so far, we can "prune" that child and need not construct or consider
         its descendants. Interestingly, there are situations where the lower bound for a node n
         is lower than the best solution so far, yet both children of n can be pruned because
         their lower bounds exceed the cost of the best solution so far.

         If neither child can be pruned, we shall, as a heuristic, consider the child with the
         smaller lower bound first, in the hope of more rapidly reaching a solution that is
         cheaper than the one so far found best.† After considering one child, we must
         consider again whether its sibling can be pruned, since a new best solution may have
         been found. For the instance of Fig. 10.21, we get the search tree of Fig. 10.22. To
         interpret nodes of that tree, it helps to understand that the capital letters are names of
         the search tree nodes. The numbers are the lower bounds, and we list the constraints
         applying to that node but none of its ancestors by writing xy if edge (x, y) must be
         included and      if (x, y) must be excluded. Also note that the constraints introduced
         at a node apply to all its descendants. Thus to get all the constraints applying at a
         node we must follow the path from that node to the root.

         Lastly, let us remark that as for backtrack search in general, we construct the tree one
         node at a time, retaining only one path, as in the recursive algorithm of Fig. 10.17, or
         its nonrecursive counterpart. The nonrecursive version is probably to be preferred, so
         that we can maintain the list of constraints conveniently on a stack.

         Example 10.10. Figure 10.22 shows the search tree for the TSP instance of Fig.
         10.21. To see how it is constructed, we begin at the root A of Fig. 10.22. The first
         edge in lexicographic order is (a, b), so we consider the two children B and C,
         corresponding to the constraints ab and      , respectively. There is, as yet, no "best
         solution so far," so we shall consider both B and C eventually.‡ Forcing (a b) to be
         included does not raise the lower bound, but excluding it raises the bound to 18.5,
         since the two cheapest legal edges for nodes a and b now total 6 and 7, respectively,
         compared with 5 and 6 with no constraints. Following our heuristic, we shall consider
         the descendants of node B first.

         The next edge in lexicographic order is (a, c). We thus introduce children D and E



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (27 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         corresponding to tours where (a, c) is included and excluded, respectively. In node D,
         we can infer that neither (a, d) nor (a, e) can be in a tour, else a would have too many
         edges incident. Following our heuristic we consider E before D, and branch on edge
         (a, d). The children F and G are introduced with lower bounds 18 and 23,
         respectively. For each of these children we know about three of the edges incident
         upon a, and so can infer something about the remaining edge (a, e).

         Consider the children of F first. The first remaining edge in lexicographic order is (b,
         c). If we include (b, c), then, as we have included (a, b), we cannot include (b, d) or
         (b, e). As we have eliminated (a, e) and (b, e), we must have (c, e) and (d, e). We
         cannot have (c, d) or c and d would have three incident edges. We are left with one
         tour (a, b, c, e, d, a), whose cost is 23. Similarly, node I, where (b, c) is excluded, can
         be proved to represent only the tour (a b, e, c, d, a), of cost 21. That tour has the
         lowest cost found so far.

         We now backtrack to E and consider its second child, G. But G has a lower bound of
         23, which exceeds the best cost so far, 21. Thus we prune G. We now backtrack to B
         and consider its other child, D. The lower bound on D is 20.5, but since costs are
         integers, we know no tour represented by D can have cost less than 21. Since we
         already have a tour that cheap, we need not explore the descendants of D, and
         therefore prune D. Now we backtrack to A and consider its second child, C.

         At the level of node C, we have only considered edge (a, b). Nodes J and K are
         introduced as children of C. J corresponds to those tours that have (a, c) but not (a,
         b), and its lower bound in 18.5. K corresponds to tours having neither (a, b) nor (a,
         c), and we may infer that those tours have (a, d) and (a, e). The lower bound for k is
         21, and we may immediately prune k , since we already know a tour that is low in
         cost.

         We next consider the children of J, which are L and M, and we prune M because its
         lower bound exceeds the best tour cost so far. The children of L are N and P,
         corresponding to tours that have (b, c), and that exclude (b, c). By considering the
         degree of nodes b and c, and remembering that the selected edges cannot form a cycle
         of fewer than all five cities, we can infer that nodes N and P each represent single
         tours. One of these, (a, c, b, e, d, a), has the lowest cost of any tour, 19. We have
         explored or pruned the entire tree and therefore end.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (28 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                                         Fig. 10.22. Search tree for TSP solution.


         10.5 Local Search Algorithms
         Sometimes the following strategy will produce an optimal solution to a problem.

               1. Start with a random solution.

               2. Apply to the current solution a transformation from some given set of
                  transformations to improve the solution. The improvement becomes the new
                  "current" solution.

               3. Repeat until no transformation in the set improves the current solution. The
                  resulting solution may or may not be optimal. In principle, if the "given set of
                  transformations" includes all the transformations that take one solution and
                  replace it by any other, then we shall never stop until we reach an optimal
                  solution. But then the time to apply (2) above is the same as the time needed
                  to examine all solutions, and the whole approach is rather pointless.

                   The method makes sense when we can restrict our set of transformations to a
                   small set, so we can consider all transformations in a short time; perhaps
                   O(n2) or O(n3) transformations should be allowed when the problem is of
                   "size" n. If the transformation set is small, it is natural to view the solutions
                   that can be transformed to one another in one step as "close." The
                   transformations are called "local transformations," and the method is called
                   local search.

         Example 10.11. One problem we can solve exactly by local search is the minimal
         spanning tree problem. The local transformations are those in which we take some
         edge not in the current spanning tree, add it to the tree, which must produce a unique
         cycle, and then eliminate exactly one edge of the cycle (presumably that of highest
         cost) to form a new tree.

         For example, consider the graph of Fig. 10.21. We might start with the tree shown in
         Fig. 10.23(a). One transformation we could perform is to add edge (d, e) and remove
         another edge in the cycle formed, which is (e, a, c, d, e). If we remove edge (a, e), we
         decrease the cost of the tree from 20 to 19. That transformation can be made, leaving
         the tree of Fig. 10.23(b), to which we again try to apply an improving transformation.
         One such is to insert edge (a, d) and delete edge (c, d) from the cycle formed. The
         result is shown in Fig. 10.23(c). Then we might introduce (a, b) and delete (b, c) as in
         Fig. 10.23(d), and subsequently introduce (b, e) in favor of (d, e). The resulting tree
         of Fig. 10.23(e) is minimal. We can check that every edge not in that tree has the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (29 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         highest cost of any edge in the cycle it forms. Thus no transformation is applicable to
         Fig. 10.23(e).

         The time taken by the algorithm of Example 10.11 on a graph of n nodes and e edges
         depends on the number of times we need to improve the solution. Just testing that no
         transformation is applicable could take O(ne) time, since e edges must be tried, and
         each could form a cycle of length nearly n Thus the algorithm is not as good as Prim's
         or Kruskal's algorithms, but serves as an example where an optimal solution can be
         obtained by local search.


         Local Search Approximation Algorithms
         Local search algorithms have had their greatest effectiveness as heuristics for the
         solution to problems whose exact solutions require exponential time. A common
         method of search is to start with a number of random solutions, and apply the local
         transformations to each, until reaching a locally optimal solution, one that no
         transformation can improve. We shall frequently reach different locally optimal
         solutions, from most or all of the random starting solutions, as suggested in Fig.
         10.24. If we are lucky, one of them will be




                                Fig. 10.23. Local search for a minimal spanning tree.

         globally optimal, that is, as good as any solution.

         In practice, we may not find a globally optimal solution as suggested in Fig. 10.24,
         since the number of locally optimal solutions may be enormous. However, we may at
         least choose that locally optimal solution that has the least cost among all those
         found. As the number of kinds of local transformations that have been used to solve
         various problems is great, we shall close the section with two examples -- the TSP,
         and a simple problem of "package placement."


         The Traveling Salesman Problem
         The TSP is one for which local search techniques have been remarkably successful.
         The simplest transformation that has been used is called "2-opting." It consists of
         taking any two edges, such as (A, B) and (C, D) in Fig. 10.25, removing them, and


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (30 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         reconnecting their endpoints to form a new tour. In Fig. 10.25, the new tour runs
         from B, clockwise to C, then along the edge (C, A), counterclockwise from A to D,
         and finally along the edge (D, B). If the sum of the lengths of (A, C) and (B, D) is less
         than the sum of the lengths of (A B) and (C, D), then we have an improved tour.†
         Note that we cannot




                                   Fig. 10.24. Local search in the space of solutions.

         connect A to D and B to C, as the result would not be a tour, but two disjoint cycles.

         To find a locally optimal tour, we start with a random tour, and consider all pairs of
         nonadjacent edges, such as (A, B) and (C, D) in Fig. 10.25. If the tour can be
         improved by replacing these edges with (A, C) and (B, D), do so, and continue
         considering pairs of edges that have not been considered before. Note that the
         introduced edges (A, C) and (B, D) must each be paired with all the other edges of the
         tour, as additional improvements could result.

         Example 10.12. Reconsider Fig. 10.21, and suppose we start with the tour of Fig.
         10.26(a). We might replace (a, e) and (c, d), with a total cost of 12, by (a, d) and (c,
         e), with a total cost of 10, as shown in Fig. 10.26(b). Then we might replace (a, b)
         and (c, e) by (a, c) and (b, e), giving the optimal tour shown in Fig. 10.26(c). One can
         check that no pair of edges can be removed from Fig. 10.26(c) and be profitably
         replaced by crossing edges with the same endpoints. As one case in point, (b, c) and
         (d, e) together have the relatively high cost of 10. But (c, e) and (b, d) are worse,
         costing 14 together.




                                                       Fig. 10.25. 2-opting.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (31 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                                 Fig. 10.26. Optimizing a TSP instance by 2-opting.

         We can generalize 2-opting to k-opting for any constant k , where we remove up to k
         edges and reconnect the remaining pieces in any order so that result is a tour. Note
         that we do not require the removed edges to be nonadjacent in general, although for
         the 2-opting case there was no point in considering the removal of two adjacent
         edges. Also note that for k >2, there is more than one way to connect the pieces. For
         example, Fig. 10.27 shows the general process of 3-opting using any of the following
         eight sets of edges.




                               Fig. 10.27. Pieces of a tour after removing three edges.

         It is easy to check that, for fixed k , the number of different k-opting transformations
         we need to consider if there are n vertices is O(n k). For example, the exact number is
         n(n-3)/2 for k = 2. The time taken to obtain a locally optimal tour may be
         considerably higher than this, however, since we could make many local
         transformations before reaching a locally optimum tour, and each improving
         transformation introduces new edges that may participate in later transformations that
         improve the tour still further. Lin and Kernighan [1973] have found that variable-
         depth-opting is in practice a very powerful method and has a good chance of getting
         the optimum tour on 40-100 city problems.


         Package Placement
         The one-dimensional package placement problem can be stated as follows. We have
         an undirected graph, whose vertices we call "packages." The edges are labeled by
         "weights," and the weight w(a, b) of edge (a, b) is the number of "wires" between
         packages a and b. The problem is to order the vertices p1, p2,..., pn, such that the sum
         of [i-j] w(pi, pj) over all pairs i and j is minimized. That is, we want to minimize the
         sum of the lengths of the wires needed to connect all the packages with the required
         number of wires.

         The package placement problem has had a number of applications. For example, the
         "packages" could be logic cards on a rack, and the weight of an interconnection
         between cards is the number of wires connecting them. A similar problem comes up
         when we try to design integrated circuits from arrays of standard modules and



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (32 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         interconnections between them. A generalization of the one-dimensional package
         placement problem allows placement of "packages," which have height and width, in
         a two-dimensional region, while minimizing the sum of the lengths of the wires
         between packages. This problem also has application to the design of integrated
         circuits, among other areas.

         There are a number of local transformations we could use to find local optima for
         instances of the one-dimensional package placement problem. Here are several.

               1. Interchange adjacent packages pi and pi+1 if the resulting order is less costly.
                  Let L(j) be the sum of the weights of the edges extending to the left of pj, i.e.,


                                      . Similarly, let R(j) be               . Improvement results if
                   L(i) - R(i) + R(i+ 1) - L(i+ 1) + 2w(pi, pi+1) is negative. The reader should
                   verify this formula by computing the costs before and after the interchange
                   and taking the difference.

               2. Take a package pi and insert it between pj and pj+1 for some i and j.
               3. Interchange any two packages pi and pj.

         Example 10.13. Suppose we take the graph of Fig. 10.21 to represent a package
         placement instance. We shall restrict ourselves to the simple transformation set (1).
         An initial placement, a, b, c, d, e, is shown in Fig. 10.28(a); it has a cost of 97. Note
         that the cost function weights edges by their distance, so (a, e) contributes 4x7 = 28
         to the cost of 97. Let us consider interchanging d with e. We have L(d) = 13, R(d) =
         6, L(e) = 24, and R(e) = 0. Thus L(d)-R(d)+R(e)- L(e)+2w(d, e) = -5, and we can
         interchange d and e to improve the placement to (a, b, c, e, d), with a cost of 92 as
         shown in Fig. 10.28(b).

         In Fig. 10.28(b), we can interchange c with e profitably, producing Fig. 10.28(c),
         whose placement (a, b, e, c, d) has a cost of 91. Fig. 10.28(c) is locally optimal for set
         of transformations (1). It is not globally optimal; (a, c, e, d, b) has a cost of 84.

         As with the TSP, we cannot estimate closely the time it takes to reach a local
         optimum. We can only observe that for set of transformations (1), there are only n-1
         transformations to consider. Further, if we compute L(i) and R(i) once, we only have
         to change them when pi is interchanged with pi-1 or pi+1. Moreover, the recalculation
         is easy. If pi and pi+1 are interchanged, for example, then the new L(i) and R(i) are,
         respectively, L(i+1) - w(pi, pi+1) and R(i+1) + w(pi, pi+1). Thus O(n) time suffices to
         test for an improving transformation and to recalculate the L(i)'s and R(i)'s. We also
         need only O(n) time to initialize the L(i)'s and R(i)'s, if we use the recurrence


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (33 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                                               Fig. 10.28. Local optimizations.

         L(1) = 0

         L(i) = L(i-1) + w(pi-1, pi)

         and a similar recurrence for R.

         In comparison, the sets of transformations (2) and (3) each have O(n2) members. It
         will therefore take O(n2) time just to confirm that we have a locally optimal solution.
         However, as for set (1), we cannot closely bound the total time taken when a
         sequence of improvements are made, since each improvement can create additional
         opportunities for improvement.


         Exercises

                           How many moves do the algorithms for moving n disks in the Towers
                 10.1
                           of Hanoi problem take?

                           Prove that the recursive (divide and conquer) algorithm for the Tower
               *10.2       of Hanoi and the simple nonrecursive algorithm described at the
                           beginning of Section 10.1 perform the same steps.

                           Show the actions of the divide-and-conquer integer multiplication
                 10.3
                           algorithm of Fig. 10.3 when multiplying 1011 by 1101.

                           Generalize the tennis tournament construction of Section 10.1 to
                           tournaments where the number of players is not a power of two. Hint.
                           If the number of players n is odd, then one player must receive a bye
               *10.4       (not play) on any given day, and it will take n days, rather than n-1 to
                           complete the tournament. However, if there are two groups with an odd
                           number of players, then the players receiving the bye from each group
                           may actually play each other.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (34 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                           We can recursively define the number of combinations of m things out

                           of n, denoted             , for n ≥1 and 0 ≤ m ≤ n, by




                                          a. Give a recursive function to compute
                 10.5
                                          b. What is its worst-case running time as a function
                                             of n?

                                          c. Give a dynamic programming algorithm to

                                               compute        .Hint. The algorithm constructs a
                                               table generally known as Pascal's triangle.

                                          d. What is the running time of your answer to (c) as
                                             a function of n.


                           One way to compute the number of combinations of m things out of n
                           is to calculate (n)(n-1)(n-2) ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ (n-m+l)/(1)(2) ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ (m).

                                a. What is the worst case running time of this algorithm as a
                 10.6              function of n?

                                b. Is it possible to compute the "World Series Odds" function P(i,
                                   j) from Section 10.2 in a similar manner? How fast can you
                                   perform this computation?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (35 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                                a. Rewrite the odds calculation of Fig. 10.7 to take into account
                                   the fact that the first team has a probability p of winning any
                                   given game.
                 10.7           b. If the Dodgers have won one game and the Yankees two, but
                                   the Dodgers have a .6 probability of winning any given game,
                                   who is more likely to win the World Series?


                           The odds calculation of Fig. 10.7 requires O(n2) space. Rewrite the
                 10.8
                           algorithm to use only O (n) space.

               *10.9 Prove that Equation (10.4) results in exactly                                       calls to P.

                           Find a minimal triangulation for a regular octagon, assuming distances
               10.10
                           are Euclidean.

                     The paragraphing problem, in a very simple form, can be stated as
                     follows: We are given a sequence of words w1, w2, . . . ,wk of lengths
                     l1, l2, . . . ,lk, which we wish to break into lines of length L. Words are
                     separated by blanks whose ideal width is b, but blanks can stretch or
                     shrink if necessary (but without overlapping words), so that a line wi
                     wi+1 ... wj has length exactly L. However, the penalty for stretching or
                     shrinking is the magnitude of the total amount by which blanks are
               10.11 stretched or shrunk. That is, the cost of setting line w w ... w for j>i
                                                                                 i i+1        j
                     is (j-i) b'-b, where b', the actual width of the blanks, is (L - li - li + 1-
                     ...- lj)/(j-i). However, if j = k (we have the last line), the cost is zero
                     unless b' < b, since we do not have to stretch the last line. Give a
                     dynamic programming algorithm to find a least-cost separation of w1,
                     w2, . . . ,wk into lines of length L. Hint. For i = k , k -1, . . ., 1, compute
                     the least cost of setting wi , wi + 1, . . . ,wk.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (36 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                           Suppose we are given n elements x1, x2,. . . ,xn related by a linear order
                           x1 < x2 < · · · < xn, and that we wish to arrange these elements m in a
                           binary search tree. Suppose that pi is the probability that a request to
                           find an element will be for xi. Then for any given binary search tree,


               10.12       the average cost of a lookup is                     , where di is the depth of
                           the node holding xi. Given the pi's, and assuming the xi's never change,
                           we can find a binary search tree that minimizes the lookup cost. Find a
                           dynamic programming algorithm to do so. What is the running time of
                           your algorithm? Hint. Compute for all i and j the optimal lookup cost
                           among all trees containing only xi, xi +1, . . . , xi +j-1, that is, the j
                           elements beginning with xi.

                           For what values of coins does the greedy change-making algorithm of
            **10.13
                           Section 10.3 produce an optimal solution?

                                          a. Write the recursive triangulation algorithm
                                             discussed in Section 10.2.
                                          b. Show that the recursive algorithm results in
               10.14
                                             exactly 3s-4 calls on nontrivial problems when
                                             started on a problem of size s≥4.


                           Describe a greedy algorithm for

                                          a. The one-dimensional package placement
                                             problem.

               10.15                      b. The paragraphing problem (Exercise 10.11).


                           Give an example where your algorithm does not produce an optimal
                           answer, or show that no such example exists.


               10.16       Give a nonrecursive version of the tree search algorithm of Fig. 10.17.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (37 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




                           Consider a game tree in which there are six marbles, and players 1 and
                           2 take turns picking from one to three marbles. The player who takes
                           the last marble loses the game.

                                          a. Draw the complete game tree for this game.

                                          b. If the game tree were searched using the alpha-
               10.17                         beta pruning technique, and nodes representing
                                             configurations with the smallest number of
                                             marbles are searched first, which nodes are
                                             pruned?

                                          c. Who wins the game if both play their best?



                     Develop a branch and bound algorithm for the TSP based on the idea
                     that we shall begin a tour at vertex 1, and at each level, branch based
                     on what node comes next in the tour (rather than on whether a
              *10.18 particular edge is chosen as in Fig. 10.22). What is an appropriate
                     lower bound estimator for configurations, which are lists of vertices 1,
                     v1, v2, . . . that begin a tour? How does your algorithm behave on Fig.
                     10.21, assuming a is vertex 1?

                     A possible local search algorithm for the paragraphing problem is to
                     allow local transformations that move the first word of one line to the
              *10.19 previous line or the last word of a line to the line following. Is this
                     algorithm locally optimal, in the sense that every locally optimal
                     solution is a globally optimal solution?

                           If our local transformations consist of 2-opts only, are there any locally
               10.20
                           optimal tours in Fig. 10.21 that are not globally optimal?


         Bibliographic Notes
         There are many important examples of divide-and-conquer algorithms including the
         O(nlogn) Fast Fourier Transform of Cooley and Tukey [1965], the O(nlognloglogn)
         integer multiplication algorithm of Schonhage and Strassen [1971], and the O(n2.81)
         matrix multiplication algorithm of Strassen [1969]. The O(n1.59) integer
         multiplication algorithm is from Karatsuba and Ofman [1962]. Moenck and Borodin
         [1972] develop several efficient divide-and-conquer algorithms for modular



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (38 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         arithmetic and polynomial interpolation and evaluation.

         Dynamic programming was popularized by Bellman [1957]. The application of
         dynamic programming to triangulation is due to Fuchs, Kedem, and Uselton [1977].
         Exercise 10.11 is from Knuth [1981]. Knuth [1971] contains a solution to the optimal
         binary search tree problem in Exercise 10.12.

         Lin and Kernighan [1973] describe an effective heuristic for the traveling salesman
         problem.

         See Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [1974] and Garey and Johnson [1979] for a
         discussion of NP-complete and other computationally difficult problems.

         1. In the towers of Hanoi case, the divide-and-conquer algorithm is really the same as
         the one given initially.

         †In what follows, we take all subscripts to be computed modulo n. Thus, in Fig. 10.8,
         vi and vi+1 could be v6 and v0, respectively, since n = 7.

         †Remember that the table of Fig. 10.11 has rows of 0's below those shown.

         ‡By "to the right" we mean in the sense of a table that wraps around. Thus, if we are
         at the rightmost column, the column "to the right" is the leftmost column.

         †In fact, we should be careful what we mean by "shortest path" when there are
         negative edges. If we allow negative cost cycles, then we could traverse such a cycle
         repeatedly to get arbitrarily large negative distances, so presumably we want to
         restrict ourselves to acyclic paths.

         †Incidentally, some of the other things good chessplaying programs do are:

               1. Use heuristics to eliminate from consideration certain moves that are unlikely
                  to be good. This helps expand the tree to more levels in a fixed time.

               2. Expand "capture chains", which are sequences of capturing moves beyond the
                  last level to which the tree is normally expanded. This helps estimate the
                  relative material strength of positions more accurately.

               3. Prune the tree search by alpha-beta pruning, as discussed later in this section.

         ‡We should not imply that only "games" can be solved in this manner. As we shall
         see in subsequent examples, the "game" could really represent the solution to a



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (39 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 10: Algorithm Design Techniques




         practical problem.

         †Note that we need not consider all n! permutations, since the starting point of a tour
         is immaterial. We may therefore consider only those permutations that begin with 1.

         †The rules for constructing the search tree will be seen to eliminate any set of
         constraints that cannot yield any tour, e.g., because three edges adjacent to one node
         are required to be in the tour.

         †An alternative is to use a heuristic to obtain a good solution using the constraints
         required for each child. For example, the reader should be able to modify the greedy
         TSP algorithm to respect constraints.

         ‡We could start with some heuristically found solution, say the greedy one, although
         that would not affect this example. The greedy solution for Fig. 10.21 has cost 21.

         †Do not be fooled by the picture of Fig. 10.25. True, if lengths of edges are distances
         in the plane, then the dashed edges in Fig. 10.25 must be longer than those they
         replace. In general, however, there is no reason to assume the distances in Fig. 10.25
         are distances in the plane, or if they are, it could have been (A B) and (C, D) that
         crossed, not (a C) and (B, D).

                                           Table of Contents              Go to Chapter 11




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1210.htm (40 of 40) [1.7.2001 19:27:46]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          Data Structures and
          Algorithms for External Storage
          We begin this chapter by considering the differences in access characteristics
          between main memory and external storage devices such as disks. We then present
          several algorithms for sorting files of externally stored data. We conclude the chapter
          with a discussion of data structures and algorithms, such as indexed files and B-trees,
          that are well suited for storing and retrieving information on secondary storage
          devices.


          11.1 A Model of External Computation
          In the algorithms discussed so far, we have assumed that the amount of input data is
          sufficiently small to fit in main memory at the same time. But what if we want to sort
          all the employees of the government by length of service or store all the information
          in the nation's tax returns? In such problems the amount of data to be processed
          exceeds the capacity of the main memory. Most large computer systems have on-line
          external storage devices, such as disks or mass storage devices, on which vast
          quantities of data can be stored. These on-line storage devices, however, have access
          characteristics that are quite different from those of main memory. A number of data
          structures and algorithms have been developed to utilize these devices more
          effectively. This chapter discusses data structures and algorithms for sorting and
          retrieving information stored in secondary memory.

               Pascal, and some other languages, provide the file data type, which is intended
          to represent data stored in secondary memory. Even if the language being used does
          not have a file data type, the operating system undoubtedly supports the notion of
          files in secondary memory. Whether we are talking about Pascal files or files
          maintained by the operating system directly, we are faced with limitations on how
          files may be accessed. The operating system divides secondary memory into equal-
          sized blocks. The size of blocks varies among operating systems, but 512 to 4096
          bytes is typical.

                We may regard a file as stored in a linked list of blocks, although more typically
          the operating system uses a tree-like arrangement, where the blocks holding the file
          are leaves of the tree, and interior nodes each hold pointers to many blocks of the
          file. If, for example, 4 bytes suffice to hold the address of a block, and blocks are
          4096 bytes long, then a root block can hold pointers to up to 1024 blocks. Thus, files
          of up to 1024 blocks, i.e., about four million bytes, could be represented by a root



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (1 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          block and blocks holding the file. Files of up to 220 blocks, or 232 bytes could be
          represented by a root block pointing to 1024 blocks at an intermediate level, each of
          which points to 1024 leaf blocks holding a part of the file, and so on.

               The basic operation on files is to bring a single block to a buffer in main
          memory; a buffer is simply a reserved area of main memory whose size is the same
          as the size of a block. A typical operating system facilitates reading the blocks in the
          order in which they appear in the list of blocks that holds the file. That is, we initially
          read the first block into the buffer for that file, then replace it by the second block,
          which is written into the same buffer, and so on.

               We can now see the rationale behind the rules for reading Pascal files. Each file
          is stored in a sequence of blocks, with a whole number of records in each block.
          (Space may be wasted, as we avoid having one record split across block boundaries.)
          The read-cursor always points to one of the records in the block that is currently in
          the buffer. When that cursor must move to a record not in the buffer, it is time to
          read the next block of the file.

                Similarly, we can view the Pascal file-writing process as one of creating a file in
          a buffer. As records are "written" into the file, they are placed in the buffer for that
          file, in the position immediately following any previously placed records. When the
          buffer cannot hold another complete record, the buffer is copied into an available
          block of secondary storage and that block is appended to the end of the list of blocks
          for that file. We can now regard the buffer as empty and write more records into it.


          The Cost Measure for Secondary Storage
          Operations
          It is the nature of secondary storage devices such as disks that the time to find a
          block and read it into main memory is large compared with the time to process the
          data in that block in simple ways. For example, suppose we have a block of 1000
          integers on a disk rotating at 1000 rpm. The time to position the head over the track
          holding this block (seek time) plus the time spent waiting for the block to come
          around to the head (latency time) might average 100 milliseconds. The process of
          writing a block into a particular place on secondary storage takes a similar amount of
          time. However, the machine could typically do 100,000 instructions in those 100
          milliseconds. This is more than enough time to do simple processing to the thousand
          integers once they are in main memory, such as summing them or finding their
          maximum. It might even be sufficient time to quicksort the integers.

                When evaluating the running time of algorithms that operate on data stored as


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (2 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          files, we are therefore forced to consider as of primary importance the number of
          times we read a block into main memory or write a block onto secondary storage.
          We call such an operation a block access. We assume the size of blocks is fixed by
          the operating system, so we cannot appear to make an algorithm run faster by
          increasing the block size, thereby decreasing the number of block accesses. As a
          consequence, the figure of merit for algorithms dealing with external storage will be
          the number of block accesses. We begin our study of algorithms for external storage
          by looking at external sorting.


          11.2 External Sorting
          Sorting data organized as files, or more generally, sorting data stored in secondary
          memory, is called "external" sorting. Our study of external sorting begins with the
          assumption that the data are stored on a Pascal file. We show how a "merge sorting"
          algorithm can sort a file of n records with only O(log n) passes through the file; that
          figure is substantially better than the O(n) passes needed by the algorithms studied in
          Chapter 8. Then we consider how utilization of certain powers of the operating
          system to control the reading and writing of blocks at appropriate times can speed up
          sorting by reducing the time that the computer is idle, waiting for a block to be read
          into or written out of main memory.


          Merge Sorting
          The essential idea behind merge sort is that we organize a file into progressively
          larger runs, that is, sequences of records r1, . . . , rk, where the key of ri is no greater
          than the key of ri+1 for 1 ≤ i < k. We say a file r1, . . . ,rm of records is organized into
          runs of length k if for all i ≥ 0 such that ki ≤ m, rk(i-l)+l, rk(i-1)+2, . . . ,rki is a run of
          length k, and furthermore if m is not divisible by k, and m = pk+q, where q<k, then
          the sequence of records rm-q+1, rm-q+2, . . . ,rm, called the tail, is a run of length q. For
          example, the sequence of integers shown in Fig. 11.1 is organized into runs of length
          3 as shown. Note that the tail is of length less than 3, but consists of records in sorted
          order, namely 5, 12.




                                           Fig. 11.1. File with runs of length three.

              The basic step of a merge sort on files is to begin with two files, say f1 and f2,
          organized into runs of length k. Assume that



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (3 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                1. the numbers of runs, including tails, on f1 and f2 differ by at most one,
                2. at most one of f1 and f2 has a tail, and
                3. the one with a tail has at least as many runs as the other.

          Then it is a simple process to read one run from each of f1 and f2, merge the runs and
          append the resulting run of length 2k onto one of two files g1 and g2, which are being
          organized into runs of length 2k. By alternating between g1 and g2, we can arrange
          that these files are not only organized into runs of length 2k, but satisfy (l), (2), and
          (3) above. To see that (2) and (3) are satisfied it helps to observe that the tail among
          the runs of f1 and f2 gets merged into (or perhaps is) the last run created.

               We begin by dividing all n of our records into two files f1 and f2, as evenly as
          possible. Any file can be regarded as organized into runs of length 1. Then we can
          merge the runs of length 1 and distribute them into files g1 and g2, organized into
          runs of length 2. We make f1 and f2 empty, and merge g1 and g2 into f1 and f2, which
          will then be organized into runs of length 4. Then we merge f1 and f2 to create g1 and
          g2 organized into runs of length 8, and so on.

               After i passes of this nature, we have two files consisting of runs of length 2i. If
          2i ≥ n, then one of the two files will be empty and the other will contain a single run
          of length n, i.e., it will be sorted. As 2i ≥ n when i ≥ logn, we see that [logn] passes
          suffice. Each pass requires the reading of two files and the writing of two files, all of
          length about n/2. The total number of blocks read or written on a pass is thus about
          2n/b, where b is the number of records that fit on one block. The number of block
          reads and writes for the entire sorting process is thus O((nlogn)/b), or put another
          way, the amount of reading and writing is about the same as that required by making
          O(logn) passes through the data stored on a single file. This figure is a large
          improvement over the O(n) passes required by many of the sorting algorithms
          discussed in Chapter 8.

              Figure 11.2 shows the merge process in Pascal. We read two files organized into
          runs of length k and write two files organized into runs of length 2k. We leave to the
          reader the specification of an algorithm, following the ideas above, that uses the
          procedure merge of Fig. 11.2 logn times to sort a file of n records.


            procedure merge ( k: integer; { the input run length }
                f1, f2, g1, g2: file of recordtype );

            var



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (4 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




               outswitch: boolean; { tells if writing g1 (true) or g2 (false) }
               winner: integer; { selects file with smaller key in current record }
               used: array [1..2] of integer; { used[j] tells how many
                 records have been read so far from the current run of file fj }
               fin: array [1..2] of boolean; { fin[j] is true if we have
                 finished the run from fj - either we have read k records,
                 or reached the end of the file of fj }
               current: array [1..2] of recordtype; { the current records
                 from the two files }


             procedure getrecord ( i: integer ); { advance file
          fi, but
                  not beyond the end of the file or the end of the run.
                  Set fin[i] if end of file or run found }
              begin
                  used[i] := used[i] + 1;
                  if (used[i] = k) or
                      (i = 1) and eof(f 1) or
                      (i = 2) and eof(f 2) then fin[i]:= true
                  else if i = 1 then read(f 1, current[1])
                  else read(f 2, current[2])
               end; { getrecord }

            begin { merge }
             outswitch := true; { first merged run goes to g 1 }
             rewrite(g 1); rewrite(g 2);
             reset(f 1); reset(f 2);
             while not eof(f 1) or not eof(f 2) do begin
          { merge two file }
                { initialize }
                used[1] := 0; used[2] := 0;
                fin[1] := false; fin[2] := false;
                getrecord(1); getrecord(2);
                while not fin[1] or not fin[2] do begin { merge two runs
          }
                   { select winner }
                   if fin[1] then winner : = 2
                       { f 2 wins by "default" - run from f 1 exhausted }
                   else if fin[2] then winner := 1
                       { f 1 wins by default }
                   else { neither run exhausted }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (5 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                      if current[1].key < current[2].key then
          winner := 1
                      else winner := 2;
                   { write winning record }
                   if outswitch then write(g 1,
          current[winner])
                   else write(g 2, current[winner]);
                   { advance winning file }
                   getrecord(winner)
                end;
                { we have finished merging two runs - switch output
                   file and repeat }
                outswitch := not outswitch
              end
            end; { merge }

                                                 Fig. 11.2. The procedure merge.

          Notice that the procedure merge, of Fig. 11.2, is not required ever to have a complete
          run in memory; it reads and writes a record at a time. It is our desire not to store
          whole runs in main memory that forces us to have two input files. Otherwise, we
          could read two runs at a time from one file.

          Example 11.1. Suppose we have the list of 23 numbers shown divided into two files
          in Fig. 11.3(a). We begin by merging runs of length 1 to create the two files of Fig.
          11.3(b). For example, the first runs of length 1 are 28 and 31; these are merged by
          picking 28 and then 31. The next two runs of length one, 3 and 5, are merged to form
          a run of length two, and that run is placed on the second file of Fig. ll.3(b). The runs
          are separated in Fig. 11.3(b) by vertical lines that are not part of the file. Notice that
          the second file in Fig. 11.3(b) has a tail of length one, the record 22, while the first
          file has no tail.

               We go from Fig. 11.3(b) to (c) by merging runs of length two. For example, the
          two runs 28, 31 and 3, 5 are merged to form 3, 5, 28, 31 in Fig. 11.3(c). By the time
          we get to runs of length 16 in Fig. 11.3(e), one file has one complete run and the
          other has only a tail, of length 7. At the last stage, where the files are ostensibly
          organized as runs of length 32, we in fact have one file with a tail only, of length 23,
          and the second file is empty. The single run of length 23 is, of course, the desired
          sorted order.


          Speeding Up Merge Sort


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (6 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          We have, for the sake of a simple example, shown the merge sort process as starting
          from runs of length one. We shall save considerable time if we begin with a pass
          that, for some appropriate k, reads groups of k records into main memory, sorts them,
          say by quicksort, and writes them out as a run of length k.

               For example, if we have a million records, it would take 20 passes through the
          data to sort starting with runs of length one. If, however, we can hold 10,000 records
          at once in main memory, we can, in one pass, read 100 groups of 10,000 records, sort
          each group, and be left with 100 runs of length 10,000 distributed evenly between
          two files. Seven more merging passes results in a file organized as one run of length
          10,000 x 27 = 1,280,000, which is more than a million and means that the data are
          sorted.


          Minimizing Elapsed Time
          In modern time-shared computer systems, one is generally not charged for the time
          one's program spends waiting for blocks of a file to be read in, as must happen
          during the merge sort process. However, the fact is that the elapsed time of such a
          sorting process is greater, often substantially so, than the time spent computing with
          data found in the main memory. If we are sorting really large files, where the whole
          operation takes hours, the elapsed time becomes important, even if we do not "pay"
          for the time, and we should consider how the merging process might be performed in
          minimum elapsed time.

              As was mentioned, it is typical that the time to read data from a disk or tape is
          greater than the time spent doing simple computations with that data,




                                                  Fig. 11.3. Merge-sorting a list.

          such as merging. We should therefore expect that if there is only one channel over
          which data can be transferred into or out of main memory, then this channel will
          form a bottleneck; the data channel will be busy all the time, and the total elapsed
          time equals the time spent moving data into and out of main memory. That is, all the
          computation will be done almost as soon as the data becomes available, while
          additional data are being read or written.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (7 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




               Even in this simple environment, we must exercise a bit of care to make sure
          that we are done in the minimum amount of time. To see what can go wrong,
          suppose we read the two input files f1 and f2 one block at a time, alternately. The
          files are organized into runs of some length much larger than the size of a block, so
          to merge two runs we must read many blocks from each file. However, suppose it
          happens that all the records in the run from file f1 happen to precede all the records
          from file f2. Then as we read blocks alternately, all the blocks from f2 have to remain
          in memory. There may not be space to hold all these blocks in main memory, and
          even if there is, we must, after reading all the blocks of the run, wait while we copy
          and write the whole run from f2.

                To avoid these problems, we consider the keys of the last records in the last
          blocks read from f1 and f2, say keys k1 and k2, respectively. If either run is
          exhausted, we naturally read next from the other file. However, if a run is not
          exhausted, we next read a block from f1 if k1<k2, and we read from f2 otherwise. That
          is, we determine which of the two runs will first have all its records currently in main
          memory selected, and we replenish the supply of records for that run first. If
          selection of records proceeds faster than reading, we know that when we have read
          the last block of the two runs, there cannot be more than two "blockfuls" of records
          left to merge; perhaps the records will be distributed over three blocks, but never
          more.


          Multiway Merge
          If reading and writing between main and secondary memory is the bottleneck,
          perhaps we could save time if we had more than one data channel. Suppose, for
          example, that we have 2m disk units, each with its own channel. We could place m
          files, f1, f2, . . .,fm on m of the disk units, say organized as runs of length k. We can
          read m runs, one from each file, and merge them into one run of length mk. This run
          is placed on one of m output files g1, g2, . . . ,gm, each getting a run in turn.

               The merging process in main memory can be carried out in O(logm) steps per
          record if we organize the m candidate records, that is, the currently smallest
          unselected records from each file, into a partially ordered tree or other data structure
          that supports the priority queue operations INSERT and DELETEMIN in
          logarithmic time. To select from the priority queue the record with the smallest key,
          we perform DELETEMIN, and then INSERT into the priority queue the next record
          from the file of the winner, as a replacement for the selected record.

                If we have n records, and the length of runs is multiplied by m with each pass,


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (8 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          then after i passes runs will be of length mi. If mi ≥ n, that is, after i = logmn passes,
          the entire list will be sorted. As logmn = log2n/log2m, we save by a factor of log2m in
          the number of times we read each record. Moreover, if m is the number of disk units
          used for input files, and m are used for output, we can process data m times as fast as
          if we had only one disk unit for input and one for output, or 2m times as fast as if
          both input and output files were stored on one disk unit. Unfortunately, increasing m
          indefinitely does not speed processing by a factor of logm. The reason is that for
          large enough m, the time to do the merging in main memory, which is actually
          increasing as logm, will exceed the time to read or write the data. At that point,
          further increases in m actually increase the elapsed time, as computation in main
          memory becomes the bottleneck.


          Polyphase Sorting
          We can perform an m-way merge sort with only m + 1 files, as an alternative to the
          2m-file strategy described above. A sequence of passes is made, merging runs from
          m of the files into longer runs on the remaining file. The insights needed are the
          following:

                1. In one pass, when runs from each of m files are merged into runs of the m +
                   1st file, we need not use all the runs on each of the m input files. Rather, each
                   file, when it becomes the output file, is filled with runs of a certain length. It
                   uses some of these runs to help fill each of the other m files when it is their
                   turn to be the output file.
                2. Each pass produces files of a different length. Since each of the files loaded
                   with runs on the previous m passes contributes to the runs of the current pass,
                   the length on one pass is the sum of the lengths of the runs produced on the
                   previous m passes. (If fewer than m passes have taken place, regard passes
                   prior to the first as having produced runs of length 1.)

               Such a merge-sorting process is called a polyphase sort. The exact calculation of
          the numbers of passes needed, as a function of m and n (the number of records), and
          calculation of the initial distribution of the runs into m files are left as exercises.
          However, we shall give one example here to suggest the general case.

          Example 11.2. If m = 2, we start with two files f1 and f2, organized into runs of
          length 1. Records from f1 and f2 are merged to make runs of length 2 on the third file,
          f3. Just enough runs are merged to empty f1. We then merge the remaining runs of
          length 1 from f2 with an equal number of runs of length 2 from f3. These yield runs
          of length 3, and are placed on f1. Then we merge runs of length 2 on f3 with runs of



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (9 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          length 3 on f1. These runs, of length 5, are placed on f2, which was emptied at the
          previous pass.

               The run length sequence: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, . . . . . is the Fibonacci sequence.
          This sequence is generated by the recurrence relation F0 = F1 = 1, and Fi = Fi-1 + Fi-
          2, for i ≥ 2. Note that the ratio of consecutive Fibonacci numbers Fi+1/Fi approaches
          the "golden ratio" (√5+1)/2 = 1.618 . . . as i gets large.

               It turns out that in order to keep this process going, until the list is sorted, the
          initial numbers of records on f1 and f2 must be two consecutive Fibonacci numbers.
          For example, Fig. 11.4 shows what happens when we start with n = 34 records (34 is
          the Fibonacci number F8) distributed 13 on f1 and 21 on f2. (13 and 21 are F6 and F7,
          so the ratio F7/F6 is very close to 1.618. It is 1.615, in fact). The status of a file is
          represented in Fig. 11.4 as a(b), meaning it has a runs of length b.




                                          Fig. 11.4. Example of polyphase sorting.


          When Input/Output Speed is not a
          Bottleneck
          When reading files is the bottleneck, the next block read must be carefully chosen.
          As we have mentioned, the situation to avoid is one where we have to store many
          blocks of one run because that run happened to have records with high keys, which
          get selected after most or all of the records of the other run. The trick to avoiding this
          problem is to determine quickly which run will first exhaust those of its records
          currently in main memory, by comparing the last such records in each file.

               When the time taken to read data into main memory is comparable to, or less
          than, the time taken to process the data, it becomes even more critical that we select
          the input file from which to read a block carefully, since there is no hope of building
          a reserve of records in main memory in case the merge process suddenly starts taking
          more records from one run than the other. The "trick" mentioned above helps us in a
          variety of situations, as we shall see.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (10 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




               We consider the case where merging, rather than reading or writing, is a
          bottleneck for two reasons.

                1. As we have seen, if we have many disk or tape units available, we may speed
                   input/output sufficiently that the time to do the merge exceeds input time or
                   output time.
                2. Higher speed channels may yet become commercially available.

              We therefore shall consider a simple model of the problem that might be
          encountered when merging becomes the bottleneck in a merge sort performed on
          data stored in secondary memory. Specifically, we assume that

                a. We are merging runs that are much larger than blocks.
                b. There are two input files and two output files. The input files are stored on
                   one disk (or other device connected to main memory by a single channel) and
                   the output files are on another similar unit with one channel.
                c. The times to
                        i. read a block
                       ii. write a block, and
                      iii. select enough of the lowest-keyed records from among those of two
                           runs presently in main memory to fill a block,
                   are all the same.

              Under these assumptions, we can consider a class of merging strategies where
          several input buffers (space to hold a block) are allocated in main memory. At all
          times some of these buffers will hold the unselected records from the two input runs,
          and one of them will be in the process of being read into from one of the input files.
          Two other buffers will hold output, that is, the selected records in their properly
          merged order. At all times, one of these buffers is in the process of being written into
          one of the output files and the other is being filled from records selected from the
          input buffers.

                A stage consists of doing the following (possibly at the same time):

                1. reading an input block into an input buffer,
                2. filling one of the output buffers with selected records, that is, records with the
                   smallest keys among those currently held in the input buffer, and
                3. writing the other output buffer into one of the two output files being formed.

          By our assumptions, (1), (2), and (3) all take the same time. For maximum
          efficiency, we must do them in parallel. We can do so, unless (2), the selection of
          records with the smallest keys, includes some of the records currently being read in.†



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (11 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          We must thus devise a strategy for selecting buffers to be read so that at the
          beginning of each stage the b unselected records with smallest keys are already in
          input buffers, where b is the number of records that fills a block or buffer.

               The conditions under which merging can be done in parallel with reading are
          simple. Let k1 and k2 be the highest keys among unselected records in main memory
          from the first and second runs, respectively. Then there must be in main memory at
          least b unselected records whose keys do not exceed min(k1, k2). We shall first show
          how to do the merge with six buffers, three used for each file, then show that four
          buffers suffice if we share them between the two files.


          A Six-Input Buffer Scheme
          Our first scheme is represented by the picture in Fig. 11.5. The two output buffers
          are not shown. There are three buffers for each file; each buffer has capacity b
          records. The shaded area represents available records, and keys are in increasing
          order clockwise around the circles. At all times, the total number of unselected
          records is 4b (unless fewer than that number of records remain from the runs being
          merged). Initially, we read the first two blocks from each run into buffers.† As there
          are always 4b records available, and at most 3b can be from one file, we know there
          are b records at least from each file. If k1 and k2 are the largest available keys from
          the two runs, there must be b records with keys equal to or less than k1 and b with
          keys equal to or less than k2. Thus, there are b records with keys equal to or less than
          min(k1, k2).




                                              Fig. 11.5. A six-input buffer merge.

               The question of which file to read from next is trivial. Usually, since two buffers
          will be partially full, as in Fig. 11.5, there will be only one empty buffer, and this
          must be filled. If it happens, as in the beginning, that each run has two completely
          filled and one empty buffer, pick either empty buffer to fill. Note that our proof that
          we could not exhaust a run [b records with keys equal to or less than min(k1, k2)
          exist] depended only on the fact that 4b records were present.

              As an aside, the arrows in Fig. 11.5 represent pointers to the first (lowest-keyed)
          available records from the two runs. In Pascal, we could represent such a pointer by



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (12 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          two integers. The first, in the range 1..3, represents the buffer pointed to, and the
          second, in the range 1..b, represents the record within the buffer. Alternatively, we
          could let the buffers be the first, middle, and last thirds of one array and use one
          integer in the range 1..3b. In other languages, where pointers can point to elements of
          arrays, a pointer of type ↑ recordtype would be preferred.


          A Four-Buffer Scheme
          Figure 11.6 suggests a four-buffer scheme. At the beginning of each stage, 2b
          records are available. Two of the input buffers are assigned to one of the files; B1 and
          B2 in Fig. 11.6 are assigned to file one. One of these buffers will be partially full
          (empty in the extreme case) and the other full. A third buffer is assigned to the other
          file, as B3 is assigned to file two in Fig. 11.6. It is partially full (completely full in the
          extreme case). The fourth buffer is uncommitted, and will be filled from one of the
          files during the stage.




                                             Fig. 11.6. A four-input buffer merge.

               We shall maintain, of course, the property that allows us to merge in parallel
          with reading; at least b of the records in Fig. 11.6 must have keys equal to or less
          than min(k1, k2), where k1 and k2 are the keys of the last available records from the
          two files, as indicated in Fig. 11.6. We call a configuration that obeys the property
          safe. Initially, we read one block from each run (this is the extreme case, where B1 is
          empty and B3 is full in Fig. 11.6), so that the initial configuration is safe. We must,
          on the assumption that Fig. 11.6 is safe, show that the configuration will be safe after
          the next stage is complete.

              If k1<k2, we choose to fill B4 with the next block from file one, and otherwise,
          we fill it from file two. Suppose first that k1<k2. Since B1 and B3 in Fig. 11.6 have
          together exactly b records, we must, during the next stage, exhaust B1, else we would
          exhaust B3 and contradict the safety of Fig. 11.6. Thus after a stage the configuration
          looks like Fig. 11.7(a).




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (13 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                                           Fig. 11.7. Configuration after one stage.

              To see that Fig. 11.7(a) is safe, consider two cases. First, if k3, the last key in the
          newly-read block B4, is less than k2, then as B4 is full, there are surely b records
          equal to or less than min(k3, k2), and the configuration is safe. If k2≤k3, then since
          k1<k2 was assumed (else we would have filled B4 from file two), the b records in B2
          and B3 have keys equal to or less than min(k2, k3)=k2.

               Now let us consider the case where k1≥k2 in Fig. 11.6. Then we choose to read
          the next block from file two. Figure 11.7(b) shows the resulting situation. As in the
          case k1<k2, we can argue that B1 must exhaust, which is why we show file one as
          having only buffer B2 in Fig. 11.7(b). The proof that Fig. 11.7(b) is safe is just like
          the proof for Fig. 11.7(a).

              Note that, as in the six buffer scheme, we do not read a file past the end of a run.
          However, if there is no need to read in a block from one of the present runs, we can
          read a block from the next run on that file. In this way we have the opportunity to
          read one block from each of the next runs, and we are ready to begin merging runs as
          soon as we have selected the last records of the previous run.


          11.3 Storing Information in Files
          In this section we consider data structures and algorithms for storing and retrieving
          information in externally stored files. We shall view a file as a sequence of records,
          where each record consists of the same sequence of fields. Fields can be either fixed
          length, having a predetermined number of bytes, or variable length, having an
          arbitrary size. Files with fixed length records are commonly used in database
          management systems to store highly structured data. Files with variable length
          records are typically used to store textual information; they are not available in
          Pascal. In this section we shall assume fixed-length fields; the fixed-length
          techniques can be modified simply to work for variable-length records.

                The operations on files we shall consider are the following.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (14 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                1. INSERT a particular record into a particular file.
                2. DELETE from a particular file all records having a designated value in each
                   of a designated set of fields.
                3. MODIFY all records in a particular file by setting to designated values certain
                   fields in those records that have a designated value in each of another set of
                   fields.
                4. RETRIEVE all records having designated values in each of a designated set
                   of fields.

          Example 11.3. For example, suppose we have a file whose records consist of three
          fields: name, address, and phone. We might ask to retrieve all records with phone =
          "555-1234", to insert the record ("Fred Jones", "12 Apple St.", "555-1234"), or to
          delete all records with name = "Fred Jones" and address = "12 Apple St." As another
          example, we might wish to modify all records with name = "Fred Jones" by setting
          the phone field to "555- 1234".

               To a great extent we can view operations on files as if the files were sets of
          records and the operations were those discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. There are two
          important differences, however. First, when we talk of files on external storage
          devices, we must use the cost measure discussed in Section l l.l when evaluating
          strategies for organizing the files. That is, we assume that files are stored in some
          number of physical blocks, and the cost of an operation is the number of blocks that
          we must read into main memory or write from main memory onto external storage.

              The second difference is that records, being concrete data types of most
          programming languages, can be expected to have pointers to them, while the abstract
          elements of a set would not normally have "pointers" to them. In particular, database
          systems frequently make use of pointers to records when organizing data. The
          consequence of such pointers is that records frequently must be regarded as pinned;
          they cannot be moved around in storage because of the possibility that a pointer from
          some unknown place would fail to point to the record after it was moved.

              A simple way to represent pointers to records is the following. Each block has a
          physical address, which is the location on the external storage device of the
          beginning of the block. It is the job of the file system to keep track of physical
          addresses. One way to represent record addresses is to use the physical address of the
          block holding the record together with an offset, giving the number of bytes in the
          block preceding the beginning of the record. These physical address--offset pairs can
          then be stored in fields of type "pointer to record."


          A Simple Organization


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (15 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          The simplest, and also least efficient, way to implement the above file operations is
          to use the file reading and writing primitives such as found in Pascal. In this
          "organization" (which is really a "lack of organization"), records can be stored in any
          order. Retrieving a record with specified values in certain fields is achieved by
          scanning the file and looking at each record to see if it has the specified values. An
          insertion into a file can be performed by appending the record to the end of the file.

               For modification of records, scan the file and check each record to see if it
          matches the designated fields, and if so, make the required changes to the record. A
          deletion operation works almost the same way, but when we find a record whose
          fields match the values required for the deletion to take place, we must find a way to
          delete the record. One possibility is to shift all subsequent records one position
          forward in their blocks, and move the first record of each subsequent block into the
          last position of the previous block of the file. However, this approach will not work
          if records are pinned, because a pointer to the ith record in the file would then point
          to the i + 1st record.

              If records are pinned, we must use a somewhat different approach. We mark
          deleted records in some way, but we do not move records to fill their space, nor do
          we ever insert a new record into their space. Thus, the record becomes deleted
          logically from the file, but its space is still used for the file. This is necessary so that
          if we ever follow a pointer to a deleted record, we shall discover that the record
          pointed to was deleted and take some appropriate action, such as making the pointer
          NIL so it will not be followed again. Two ways to mark records as deleted are:

                1. Replace the record by some value that could never be the value of a "real"
                   record, and when following a pointer, assume the record is deleted if it has
                   that value.
                2. Let each record have a deletion bit, a single bit that is 1 in records that have
                   been deleted and 0 otherwise.


          Speeding Up File Operations
          The obvious disadvantage of a sequential file is that file operations are slow. Each
          operation requires us to read the entire file, and some blocks may have to be
          rewritten as well. Fortunately, there are file organizations that allow us to access a
          record by reading into main memory only a small fraction of the entire file.

               To make such organizations possible, we assume each record of a file has a key,
          a set of fields that uniquely identifies each record. For example, the name field of the
          name-address-phone file might be considered a key by itself. That is, we might



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (16 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          assume that two records with the same name field value cannot exist simultaneously
          in the file. Retrieval of a record, given values for its key fields, is a common
          operation, and one that is made especially easy by many common file organizations.

               Another element we need for fast file operations is the ability to access blocks
          directly, rather than running sequentially through the blocks holding a file. Many of
          the data structures we use for fast file operations will use pointers to the blocks
          themselves, which are the physical addresses of the blocks, as described above.
          Unfortunately, we cannot write in Pascal, or in many other languages, programs that
          deal with data on the level of physical blocks and their addresses; such operations are
          normally done by file system commands. However, we shall briefly give an informal
          description of how organizations that make use of direct block access work.


          Hashed Files
          Hashing is a common technique used to provide fast access to information stored on
          secondary files. The basic idea is similar to open hashing discussed in Section 4.7.
          We divide the records of a file among buckets, each consisting of a linked list of one
          or more blocks of external storage. The organization is similar to that portrayed in
          Fig. 4.10. There is a bucket table containing B pointers, one for each bucket. Each
          pointer in the bucket table is the physical address of the first block of the linked-list
          of blocks for that bucket.

               The buckets are numbered 0, 1, . . . . ,B - 1. A hash function h maps each key
          value into one of the integers 0 through B - 1. If x is a key, h(x) is the number of the
          bucket that contains the record with key x, if such a record is present at all. The
          blocks making up each bucket are chained together in a linked list. Thus, the header
          of the ith block of a bucket contains a pointer to the physical address of the i + 1st
          block. The last block of a bucket contains a NIL pointer in its header.

              This arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 11.8. The major difference between Figs.
          11.8 and 4.10 is that here, elements stored in one block of a bucket do not need to be
          chained by pointers; only the blocks need to be chained.




                           Fig. 11.8. Hashing with buckets consisting of chained blocks.

                If the size of the bucket table is small, it can be kept in main memory.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (17 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          Otherwise, it can be stored sequentially on as many blocks as necessary. To look for
          the record with key x, we compute h(x), and find the block of the bucket table
          containing the pointer to the first block of bucket h(x). We then read the blocks of
          bucket h(x) successively, until we find a block that contains the record with key x. If
          we exhaust all blocks in the linked list for bucket h(x), we conclude that x is not the
          key of any record.

               This structure is quite efficient if the operation is one that specifies values for the
          fields in the key, such as retrieving the record with a specified key value or inserting
          a record (which, naturally, specifies the key value for that record). The average
          number of block accesses required for an operation that specifies the key of a record
          is roughly the average number of blocks in a bucket, which is n/bk if n is the number
          of records, a block holds b records, and k is the number of buckets. Thus, on the
          average, operations based on keys are k times faster with this organization than with
          the unorganized file. Unfortunately, operations not based on keys are not speeded up,
          as we must examine essentially all the buckets during these other operations. The
          only general way to speed up operations not based on keys seems to be the use of
          secondary indices, which are discussed at the end of this section.

               To insert a record with key value x, we first check to see if there is already a
          record with key x. If there is, we report error, since we assume that the key uniquely
          identifies each record. If there is no record with key x, we insert the new record in
          the first block in the chain for bucket h(x) into which the record can fit. If the record
          cannot fit into any existing block in the chain for bucket h(x), we call upon the file
          system to find a new block into which the record is placed. This new block is then
          added to the end of the chain for bucket h(x).

               To delete a record with key x, we first locate the record, and then set its deletion
          bit. Another possible deletion strategy (which cannot be used if the records are
          pinned) is to replace the deleted record with the last record in the chain for h(x). If
          the removal of the last record makes the last block in the chain for h(x) empty, we
          can then return the empty block to the file system for later re-use.

               A well-designed hashed-access file organization requires only a few block
          accesses for each file operation. If our hash function is good, and the number of
          buckets is roughly equal to the number of records in the file divided by the number
          of records that can fit on one block, then the average bucket consists of one block.
          Excluding the number of block accesses to search the bucket table, a typical retrieval
          based on keys will then take one block access, and a typical insertion, deletion, or
          modification will take two block accesses. If the average number of records per
          bucket greatly exceeds the number that will fit on one block, we can periodically
          reorganize the hash table by doubling the number of buckets and splitting each



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (18 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          bucket into two. The ideas were covered at the end of Section 4.8.


          Indexed Files
          Another common way to organize a file of records is to maintain the file sorted by
          key values. We can then search the file as we would a dictionary or telephone
          directory, scanning only the first name or word on each page. To facilitate the search
          we can create a second file, called a sparse index, which consists of pairs (x, b),
          where x is a key value and b is the physical address of the block in which the first
          record has key value x. This sparse index is maintained sorted by key values.

          Example 11.4. In Fig. 11.9 we see a file and its sparse index file. We assume that
          three records of the main file, or three pairs of the index file, fit on one block. Only
          the key values, assumed to be single integers, are shown for records in the main file.

               To retrieve a record with a given key x, we first search the index file for a pair
          (x, b). What we actually look for is the largest z such that z ≤ x and there is a pair (z,
          b) in the index file. Then key x appears in block b if it is present in the main file at
          all.

               There are several strategies that can be used to search the index file. The
          simplest is linear search. We read the index file from the beginning until we
          encounter a pair (x, b), or until we encounter the first pair (y, b) where y > x. In the
          latter case, the preceding pair (z, b´) must have z < x, and if the record with key x is
          anywhere, it is in block b´.

                Linear search is only suitable for small index files. A faster method is




                                         Fig. 11.9. A main file and its sparse index.

          binary search. Assume the index file is stored on blocks b1, b2, . . . ,bn. To search for
          key value x, we take the middle block b[n/2] and compare x with the key value y in
          the first pair in that block. If x < y, we repeat the search on blocks b1, b2, . . .,b[n/2]-1.
          If x ≥ y, but x is less than the key of block b[n/2]+1 (or if n=1, so there is no such
          block), we use linear search to see if x matches the first component of an index pair
          on block b[n/2]. Otherwise, we repeat the search on blocks b[n/2]+1, b[n/2]+2, . . . ,bn.
          With binary search we need examine only [log2(n + 1)] blocks of the index file.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (19 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




               To initialize an indexed file, we sort the records by their key values, and then
          distribute the records to blocks, in that order. We may choose to pack as many as
          will fit into each block. Alternatively, we may prefer to leave space for a few extra
          records that may be inserted later. The advantage is that then insertions are less likely
          to overflow the block into which the insertion takes place, with the resultant
          requirement that adjacent blocks be accessed. After partitioning the records into
          blocks in one of these ways, we create the index file by scanning each block in turn
          and finding the first key on each block. Like the main file, some room for growth
          may be left on the blocks holding the index file.

              Suppose we have a sorted file of records that are stored on blocks B1, B2, . . .
          ,Bm. To insert a new record into this sorted file, we use the index file to determine
          which block Bi should contain the new record. If the new record will fit in Bi, we
          place it there, in the correct sorted order. We then adjust the index file, if the new
          record becomes the first record on Bi.

               If the new record cannot fit in Bi, a variety of strategies are possible. Perhaps the
          simplest is to go to block Bi+1, which can be found through the index file, to see if
          the last record of Bi can be moved to the beginning of Bi+1. If so, this last record is
          moved to Bi+1, and the new record can then be inserted in the proper position in Bi.
          The index file entry for Bi+1, and possibly for Bi, must be adjusted appropriately.

               If Bi+1 is also full, or if Bi is the last block (i = m), then a new block is obtained
          from the file system. The new record is inserted in this new block, and the new block
          is to follow block Bi in the order. We now use this same procedure to insert a record
          for the new block in the index file.


          Unsorted Files with a Dense Index
          Another way to organize a file of records is to maintain the file in random order and
          have another file, called a dense index, to help locate records. The dense index
          consists of pairs (x, p), where p is a pointer to the record with key x in the main file.
          These pairs are sorted by key value, so a structure like the sparse index mentioned
          above, or the B-tree mentioned in the next section, could be used to help find keys in
          the dense index.

               With this organization we use the dense index to find the location in the main
          file of a record with a given key. To insert a new record, we keep track of the last
          block of the main file and insert the new record there, getting a new block from the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (20 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          file system if the last block is full. We also insert a pointer to that record in the dense
          index file. To delete a record, we simply set the deletion bit in the record and delete
          the corresponding entry in the dense index (perhaps by setting a deletion bit there
          also).


          Secondary Indices
          While the hashed and indexed structures speed up operations based on keys
          substantially, none of them help when the operation involves a search for records
          given values for fields other than the key fields. If we wish to find the records with
          designated values in some set of fields F1, . . . . ,Fk we need a secondary index on
          those fields. A secondary index is a file consisting of pairs (v, p), where v is a list of
          values, one for each of the fields F1, . . . ,Fk, and p is a pointer to a record. There
          may be more than one pair with a given v, and each associated pointer is intended to
          indicate a record of the main file that has v as the list of values for the fields F1, . . .
          ,Fk.

               To retrieve records given values for the fields F1, . . . ,Fk, we look in the
          secondary index for a record or records with that list of values. The secondary index
          itself can be organized in any of the ways discussed for the organization of files by
          key value. That is, we pretend that v is a key for (v, p).

               For example, a hashed organization does not really depend on keys being
          unique, although if there were very many records with the same "key" value, then
          records might distribute themselves into buckets quite nonuniformly, with the effect
          that hashing would not speed up access very much. In the extreme, say there were
          only two values for the fields of a secondary index. Then all but two buckets would
          be empty, and the hash table would only speed up operations by a factor of two at
          most, no matter how many buckets there were. Similarly, a sparse index does not
          require that keys be unique, but if they are not, then there may be two or more blocks
          of the main file that have the same lowest "key" value, and all such blocks will be
          searched when we are looking for records with that value.

               With either the hashed or sparse index organization for our secondary index file,
          we may wish to save space by bunching all records with the same value. That is, the
          pairs (v, p1), (v, p2), . . . ,(v, pm) can be replaced by v followed by the list p1, p2, . . .
          ,pm.

              One might naturally wonder whether the best response time to random
          operations would not be obtained if we created a secondary index for each field, or



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (21 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          even for all subsets of the fields. Unfortunately, there is a penalty to be paid for each
          secondary index we choose to create. First, there is the space needed to store the
          secondary index, and that may or may not be a problem, depending on whether space
          is at a premium.

               In addition, each secondary index we create slows down all insertions and all
          deletions. The reason is that when we insert a record, we must also insert an entry for
          that record into each secondary index, so the secondary indices will continue to
          represent the file accurately. Updating a secondary index takes at least two block
          accesses, since we must read and write one block. However, it may take considerably
          more than two block accesses, since we have to find that block, and any organization
          we use for the secondary index file will require a few extra accesses, on the average,
          to find any block. Similar remarks hold for each deletion. The conclusion we draw is
          that selection of secondary indices requires judgment, as we must determine which
          sets of fields will be specified in operations sufficiently frequently that the time to be
          saved by having that secondary index available more than balances the cost of
          updating that index on each insertion and deletion.


          11.4 External Search Trees
          The tree data structures presented in Chapter 5 to represent sets can also be used to
          represent external files. The B-tree, a generalization of the 2-3 tree discussed in
          Chapter 5, is particularly well suited for external storage, and it has become a
          standard organization for indices in database systems. This section presents the basic
          techniques for retrieving, inserting, and deleting information in B-trees.


          Multiway Search Trees
          An m-ary search tree is a generalization of a binary search tree in which each node
          has at most m children. Generalizing the binary search tree property, we require that
          if n1 and n2 are two children of some node, and n1 is to the left of n2, then the
          elements descending from n1 are all less than the elements descending from n2. The
          operations of MEMBER, INSERT, and DELETE for an m-ary search tree are
          implemented by a natural generalization of those operations for binary search trees,
          as discussed in Section 5.1.

               However, we are interested here in the storage of records in files, where the files
          are stored in blocks of external storage. The correct adaptation of the multiway tree
          idea is to think of the nodes as physical blocks. An interior node holds pointers to its
          m children and also holds the m-1 key values that separate the descendants of the



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (22 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          children. Leaf nodes are also blocks; these blocks hold the records of/P>

              If we used a binary search tree of n nodes to represent an externally stored file,
          then it would require log2n block accesses to retrieve a record from the file, on the
          average. If instead, we use an m-ary search tree to represent the file, it would take an
          average of only logmn block accesses to retrieve a record. For n = 106, the binary
          search tree would require about 20 block accesses, while a 128-way search tree
          would take only 3 block accesses.

               We cannot make m arbitrarily large, because the larger m is, the larger the block
          size must be. Moreover, it takes longer to read and process a larger block, so there is
          an optimum value for m to minimize the amount of time needed to search an external
          m-ary search tree. In practice a value close to the minimum is obtained for a broad
          range of m's. (See Exercise 11.18).


          B-trees
          A B-tree is a special kind of balanced m-ary tree that allows us to retrieve, insert, and
          delete records from an external file with a guaranteed worst-case performance. It is a
          generalization of the 2-3 tree discussed in Section 5.4. Formally, a B-tree of order m
          is an m-ary search tree with the following properties:

                1. The root is either a leaf or has at least two children.
                2. Each node, except for the root and the leaves, has between [m/2] and m
                   children.
                3. Each path from the root to a leaf has the same length.

          Note that every 2-3 tree is a B-tree of order 3. Figure 11.10 shows a B-tree of order
          5, in which we assume that at most three records fit in a leaf block.




                                                   Fig. 11.10. B-tree of order 5.

              We can view a B-tree as a hierarchical index in which each node occupies a
          block in external storage. The root of the B-tree is the first level index. Each non-leaf
          node in the B-tree is of the form

                                                   (p0, k1, p1, k2, p2, . . . ,kn, pn)



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (23 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          where pi is a pointer to the ith child of the node, 0 ≤ i ≤ n, and ki is a key, 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
          The keys within a node are in sorted order so k1 < k2 < ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ < kn. All keys in the
          subtree pointed to by po are less than k1. For 1 ≤ i < n, all keys in the subtree pointed
          to by pi have values greater than or equal to ki and less than ki+1. All keys in the
          subtree pointed to by pn are greater than or equal to kn.

              There are several ways to organize the leaves. Here we shall assume that the
          main file is stored only in the leaves. Each leaf is assumed to occupy one block.


          Retrieval
          To retrieve a record r with key value x, we trace the path from the root to the leaf that
          contains r, if it exists in the file. We trace this path by successively fetching interior
          nodes (p0, k1, p1, . . . ,kn, pn) from external storage into main memory and finding the
          position of x relative to the keys k1, k2, . . . ,kn. If ki ≤ x < ki+1, we next fetch the node
          pointed to by pi and repeat the process. If x < k1, we use p0 to fetch the next node; if
          x ≥ kn, we use pn. When this process brings us to a leaf, we search for the record with
          key value x. If the number of entries in a node is small, we can use linear search
          within the node; otherwise, it would pay to use binary search.


          Insertion
          Insertion into a B-tree is similar to insertion into a 2-3 tree. To insert a record r with
          key value x into a B-tree, we first apply the lookup procedure to locate the leaf L at
          which r should belong. If there is room for r in L, we insert r into L in the proper
          sorted order. In this case no modifications need to be made to the ancestors of L.

               If there is no room for r in L, we ask the file system for a new block L′ and move
          the last half of the records from L to L′, inserting r into its proper place in L or L′.†
          Let node P be the parent of node L. P is known, since the lookup procedure traced a
          path from the root to L through P. We now apply the insertion procedure recursively
          to place in P a key k′ and a pointer l′ to L′; k′ and l′ are inserted immediately after the
          key and pointer for L. The value of k′ is the smallest key value in L′.

              If P already has m pointers, insertion of k′ and l′ into P will cause P to be split
          and require an insertion of a key and pointer into the parent of P. The effects of this
          insertion can ripple up through the ancestors of node L back to the root, along the
          path that was traced by the original lookup procedure. It may even be necessary to


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (24 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          split the root, in which case we create a new root with the two halves of the old root
          as its two children. This is the only situation in which a node may have fewer than
          m/2 children.


          Deletion
          To delete a record r with key value x, we first find the leaf L containing r. We then
          remove r from L, if it exists. If r is the first record in L, we then go to P, the parent of
          L, to set the key value in P's entry for L to be the new first key value of L. However,
          if L is the first child of P, the first key of L is not recorded in P, but rather will appear
          in one of the ancestors of P, specifically, the lowest ancestor A such that L is not the
          leftmost descendant of A. Therefore, we must propagate the change in the lowest key
          value of L backwards along the path from the root to L.

               If L becomes empty after deletion, we give L back to the file system.† We now
          adjust the keys and pointers in P to reflect the removal of L. If the number of
          children of P is now less than m/2, we examine the node P′ immediately to the left
          (or the right) of P at the same level in the tree. If P′ has at least [m/2] + 1 children,
          we distribute the keys and pointers in P and P′ evenly between P and P′, keeping the
          sorted order of course, so that both nodes will have at least [m/2] children. We then
          modify the key values for P and P′ in the parent of P, and, if necessary, recursively
          ripple the effects of this change to as many ancestors of P as are affected.

              If P′ has exactly [m/2] children, we combine P and P′ into a single node with
          2[m/2] - 1 children (this is m children at most). We must then remove the key and
          pointer to P′ from the parent for P′. This deletion can be done with a recursive
          application of the deletion procedure.

               If the effects of the deletion ripple all the way back to the root, we may have to
          combine the only two children of the root. In this case the resulting combined node
          becomes the new root, and the old root can be returned to the file system. The height
          of the B-tree has now been reduced by one.

          Example 11.5. Consider the B-tree of order 5 in Fig. 11.10. Inserting the record with
          key value 23 into this tree produces the B-tree in Fig. 11.11. To insert 23, we must
          split the block containing 22, 23, 24, and 26, since we assume that at most three
          records fit in one block. The two smaller stay in that block, and the larger two are
          placed in a new block. A pointer-key pair for the new node must be inserted into the
          parent, which then splits because it cannot hold six pointers. The root receives the
          pointer-key pair for the new node, but the root does not split because it has excess
          capacity.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (25 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




               Removing record 10 from the B-tree of Fig. 11.11 results in the B-tree of Fig.
          11.12. Here, the block containing 10 is discarded. Its parent now has only two
          children, and the right sibling of the parent has the minimum number, three. Thus we
          combine the parent with its sibling, making one node with five children.




                                                Fig. 11.11. B-tree after insertion.




                                                 Fig. 11.12. B-tree after deletion.


          Time Analysis of B-tree Operations
          Suppose we have a file with n records organized into a B-tree of order m. If each leaf
          contains b records on the average, then the tree has about [n/b] leaves. The longest
          possible paths in such a tree will occur if each interior node has the fewest children
          possible, that is, m/2 children. In this case there will be about 2[n/b]/m parents of
          leaves, 4[n/b]/m2 parents of parents of leaves, and so on.

               If there are j nodes along the path from the root to a leaf, then 2j-1[n/b]/mj-1 ≥ 1,
          or else there would be fewer than one node at the root's level. Therefore, [n/b] ≥
          (m/2)j-1, and j ≤ 1 -- logm/2[n/b]. For example, if n = 106, b = 10, and m = 100, then j
          ≤ 3.9. Note that b is not the maximum number of records we can put in a block, but
          an average or expected number. However, by redistributing records among
          neighboring blocks whenever one gets less than half full, we can ensure that b is at
          least half the maximum value. Also note that we have assumed in the above that each
          interior node has the minimum possible number of children. In practice, the average
          interior node will have more than the minimum, and the above analysis is therefore
          conservative.

               For an insertion or deletion, j block accesses are needed to locate the appropriate
          leaf. The exact number of additional block accesses that are needed to accomplish
          the insertion or deletion, and to ripple its effects through the tree, is difficult to
          compute. Most of the time only one block, the leaf storing the record of interest,
          needs to be rewritten. Thus, 2 + logm/2[n/b] can be taken as the approximate number



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (26 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          of block accesses for an insertion or deletion.


          Comparison of Methods
          We have discussed hashing, sparse indices, and B-trees as possible methods for
          organizing external files. It is interesting to compare, for each method, the number of
          block accesses involved in a file operation.

              Hashing is frequently the fastest of the three methods, requiring two block
          accesses on average for each operation (excluding the block accesses required to
          search the bucket table), if the number of buckets is sufficiently large that the typical
          bucket uses only one block. With hashing, however, we cannot easily access the
          records in sorted order.

              A sparse index on a file of n records allows the file operations to be done in
          about 2 + log(n/bb′) block accesses using binary search; here b is the number of
          records that fit on a block, and b′ is the number of key-pointer pairs that fit on a
          block for the index file. B-trees allow file operations in about 2 + logm/2[n/b] block
          accesses, where m, the maximum degree of the interior nodes, is approximately b′.
          Both sparse indices and B-trees allow records to be accessed in sorted order.

               All of these methods are remarkably good compared to the obvious sequential
          scan of a file. The timing differences among them, however, are small and difficult
          to determine analytically, especially considering that the relevant parameters such as
          the expected file length and the occupancy rates of blocks are hard to predict in
          advance.

               It appears that the B-tree is becoming increasingly popular as a means of
          accessing files in database systems. Part of the reason lies in its ability to handle
          queries asking for records with keys in a certain range (which benefit from the fact
          that the records appear in sorted order in the main file). The sparse index also
          handles such queries efficiently, but is almost sure to be less efficient than the B-tree.
          Intuitively, the reason B-trees are superior to sparse indices is that we can view a B-
          tree as a sparse index on a sparse index on a sparse index, and so on. (Rarely,
          however, do we need more than three levels of indices.)

               B-trees also perform relatively well when used as secondary indices, where
          "keys" do not really define a unique record. Even if the records with a given value
          for the designated fields of a secondary index extend over many blocks, we can read
          them all with a number of block accesses that is just equal to the number of blocks
          holding these records plus the number of their ancestors in the B-tree. In comparison,



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (27 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          if these records plus another group of similar size happen to hash to the same bucket,
          then retrieval of either group from a hash table would require a number of block
          accesses about double the number of blocks on which either group would fit. There
          are possibly other reasons for favoring the B-tree, such as their performance when
          several processes are accessing the structure simultaneously, that are beyond the
          scope of this book.


          Exercises

                            Write a program concatenate that takes a sequence of file names as
                  11.1      arguments and writes the contents of the files in turn onto the standard
                            output, thereby concatenating the files.

                            Write a program include that copies its input to its output except when
                            it encounters a line of the form #include filename, in which case it is to
                  11.2
                            replace this line with the contents of the named file. Note that included
                            files may also contain #include statements.

                            How does your program for Exercise 11.2 behave when a file includes
                  11.3
                            itself?

                            Write a program compare that will compare two files record-by-record
                  11.4
                            to determine whether the two files are identical.

                            Rewrite the file comparison program of Exercise 11.4 using the LCS
                *11.5       algorithm of Section 5.6 to find the longest common subsequence of
                            records in both files.

                            Write a program find that takes two arguments consisting of a pattern
                            string and a file name, and prints all lines of the file containing the
                  11.6      pattern string as a substring. For example, if the pattern string is "ufa"
                            and the file is a word list, then find prints all words containing the
                            trigram "ufa."

                            Write a program that reads a file and writes on its standard output the
                  11.7
                            records of the file in sorted order.

                            What are the primitives Pascal provides for dealing with external files?
                  11.8
                            How would you improve them?




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (28 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                            Suppose we use a three-file polyphase sort, where at the ith phase we
                            create a file with ri runs of length li. At the nth phase we want one run
                            on one of the files and none on the other two. Explain why each of the
                            following must be true

                                            a. li = li-i + li- 2 for i ≥ 1, where l0 and l-1 are taken
                                               to be the lengths of runs on the two initially
                *11.9                          occupied files.

                                            b. ri = ri-2 - ri- 1 (or equivalently, ri-2 = ri-1 + ri for i
                                               ≥ 1), where r0 and r-1 are the number of runs on
                                               the two initial files.

                                            c. rn = rn-1 = 1, and therefore, rn, rn-1, . . . ,r1, forms
                                               a Fibonacci sequence.


                            What additional condition must be added to those of Exercise 11.9 to
                            make a polyphase sort possible

                                            a. with initial runs of length one (i.e., lo=l- 1=1)

              *11.10                        b. running for k phases, but with initial runs other
                                               than one allowed.

                                 Hint. Consider a few examples, like ln = 50, ln-1 = 31, or ln = 50, ln-
                            1 = 32.

                            Generalize Exercises 11.9 and 11.10 to polyphase sorts with more than
            **11.11
                            three files.

                            Show that:

                                            a. Any external sorting algorithm that uses only one
                                               tape as external storage must take Ω(n2) time to
            **11.12                            sort n records.

                                            b. O(n log n) time suffices if there are two tapes to
                                               use as external storage.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (29 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                            Suppose we have an external file of directed arcs x → y that form a
                            directed acyclic graph. Assume that there is not enough space in
                            internal memory to hold the entire set of vertices or edges at one time.

                                            a. Write an external topological sort program that
                                               prints out a linear ordering of the vertices such
                                               that if x → y is a directed arc, then vertex x
                                               appears before vertex y in the linear

                11.13                       b. What is the time and space complexity of your
                                               program as a function of the number of block
                                               accesses?

                                            c. What does your program do if the directed graph
                                               is cyclic?

                                            d. What is the minimum number of block accesses
                                               needed to topologically sort an externally stored
                                               dag?


                            Suppose we have a file of one million records, where each record takes
                            100 bytes. Blocks are 1000 bytes long, and a pointer to a block takes 4
                11.14
                            bytes. Devise a hashed organization for this file. How many blocks are
                            needed for the bucket table and the buckets?

                11.15       Devise a B-tree organization for the file of Exercise 11.14.

                            Write programs to implement the operations RETRIEVE, INSERT,
                            DELETE, and MODIFY on

                                            a. hashed files,
                11.16
                                            b. indexed files,

                                            c. B-tree files.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (30 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                            Write a program to find the kth largest element in


                11.17                       a. a sparse-indexed file

                                            b. a B-tree file


                            Assume that it takes a + bm milliseconds to read a block containing a
                            node of an m-ary search tree. Assume that it takes c + d log2m
                            milliseconds to process each node in internal memory. If there are n
                            nodes in the tree, we need to read about logmn nodes to locate a given
                            record. Therefore, the total time taken to find a given record in the tree
                            is
                11.18
                                 (logmn)(a + bm + c + d log2m) = (log2n)((a + c + bm)/log2m + d)

                            milliseconds. Make reasonable estimates for the values of a, b, c, and d
                            and plot this quantity as a function of m. For what value of m is the
                            minimum attained?

                            A B*-tree is a B-tree in which each interior node is at least 2/3 full
                            (rather than just 1/2 full). Devise an insertion scheme for B*-trees that
              *11.19        delays splitting interior nodes until two sibling nodes are full. The two
                            full nodes can then be divided into three, each 2/3 full. What are the
                            advantages and disadvantages of B*-trees compared with B-trees?

                            When the key of a record is a string of characters, we can save space
                            by storing only a prefix of the key as the key separator in each interior
              *11.20        node of the B-tree. For example, "cat" and "dog" could be separated by
                            the prefix "d" or "do" of "dog." Devise a B-tree insertion algorithm
                            that uses prefix key separators that at all times are as short as possible.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (31 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                     Suppose that the operations on a certain file are insertions and
                     deletions fraction p of the time, and the remaining 1-p of the time are
                     retrievals where exactly one field is specified. There are k fields in
                     records, and a retrieval specifies the ith field with probability qi.
                     Assume that a retrieval takes a milliseconds if there is no secondary
              *11.21 index for the specified field, and b milliseconds if the field has a
                     secondary index. Also assume that an insertion or deletion takes c + sd
                     milliseconds, where s is the number of secondary indices. Determine,
                     as a function of a, b, c, d, p, and the qi's, which secondary indices
                     should be created for the file in order that the average time per
                     operation be minimized.

                     Suppose that keys are of a type that can be linearly ordered, such as
                     real numbers, and that we know the probability distribution with which
                     keys of given values will appear in the file. We could use this
                     knowledge to outperform binary search when looking for a key in a
                     sparse index. One scheme, called interpolation search, uses this
                     statistical information to predict where in the range of index blocks Bi,
                     . . . ,Bj to which the search has been limited, a key x is most likely to
              *11.22 lie. Give

                                            a. an algorithm to take advantage of statistical
                                               knowledge in this way, and

                                            b. a proof that O(loglogn ) block accesses suffice,
                                               on the average, to find a key.


                            Suppose we have an external file of records, each consisting of an edge
                            of a graph G and a cost associated with that edge.

                                            a. Write a program to construct a minimum-cost
                                               spanning tree for G, assuming that there is
                                               enough memory to store all the vertices of G in
                                               core but not all the edges.

                                            b. What is the time complexity of your program as a
                                               function of the number of vertices and edges?
                11.23
                                Hint. One approach to this problem is to maintain a forest of
                            currently connected components in core. Each edge is read and
                            processed as follows: If the next edge has ends in two different


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (32 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




                            components, add the edge and merge the components. If the edge
                            creates a cycle in an existing component, add the edge and remove the
                            highest cost edge from that cycle (which may be the current edge).
                            This approach is similar to Kruskal's algorithm but does not require the
                            edges to be sorted, an important consideration in this problem.


                      Suppose we have a file containing a sequence of positive and negative
                      numbers a1, a2, . . . ,an. Write an O(n) program to find a contiguous
                11.24
                      subsequence ai, ai+1, . . . ,aj that has the largest sum ai + ai+1 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ + aj
                      of any such subsequence.


          Bibliographic Notes
          For additional material on external sorting see Knuth [1973]. Further material on
          external data structures and their use in database systems can be found there and in
          Ullman [1982] and Wiederhold [1982]. Polyphase sorting in discussed by Shell
          [1971]. The six-buffer merging scheme in Section 11.2 is from Friend [1956] and the
          four-buffer scheme from Knuth [1973].

              Secondary index selection, of which Exercise 11.21 is a simplification, is
          discussed by Lum and Ling [1970] and Schkolnick [1975]. B-trees originated with
          Bayer and McCreight [1972]. Comer [1979] surveys the many variations, and Gudes
          and Tsur [1980] discusses their performance in practice.

              Information about Exercise 11.12, one- and two- tape sorting, can be found in
          Floyd and Smith [1973]. Exercise 11.22 on interpolation search is discussed in detail
          by Yao and Yao [1976] and Perl, Itai, and Avni [1978].

              An elegant implementation of the approach suggested in Exercise 11.23 to the
          external minimum-cost spanning tree problem was devised by V. A. Vyssotsky
          around 1960 (unpublished). Exercise 11.24 is due to M. I. Shamos.

          † It is tempting to assume that if (1) and (2) take the same time, then selection could
          never catch up with reading; if the whole block were not yet read, we would select
          from the first records of the block, those that had the lower keys, anyway. However,
          the nature of reading from disks is that a long period elapses before the block is
          found and anything at all is read. Thus our only safe assumption is that nothing of the
          block being read in a stage is available for selection during that stage.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (33 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 11: Data Structures and Algorithms for External Storage




          † If these are not the first runs from each file, then this initialization can be done
          after the previous runs were read and the last 4b records from these runs are being
          merged.

          † This strategy is the simplest of a number of responses that can be made to the
          situation where a block has to be split. Some other choices, providing higher average
          occupancy of blocks at the cost of extra work with each insertion, are mentioned in
          the exercises.

          † We can use a variety of strategies to prevent leaf blocks from ever becoming
          completely empty. In particular, we describe below a scheme for preventing interior
          nodes from getting less than half full, and this technique can be applied to the leaves
          as well, with a value of m equal to the largest number of records that will fit in one
          block.

                                            Table of Contents              Go to Chapter 12




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1211.htm (34 of 34) [1.7.2001 19:28:20]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_1.gif [1.7.2001 19:28:24]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_2.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_2.gif [1.7.2001 19:28:27]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_4.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_4.gif [1.7.2001 19:28:34]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_5.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_5.gif [1.7.2001 19:28:46]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_6.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_6.gif [1.7.2001 19:28:54]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_8.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_8.gif [1.7.2001 19:29:03]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_9.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_9.gif [1.7.2001 19:29:08]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_10.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_10.gif [1.7.2001 19:29:14]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_11.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_11.gif [1.7.2001 19:29:28]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_12.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_12.gif [1.7.2001 19:29:33]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_13.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_13.gif [1.7.2001 19:29:40]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_14.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_14.gif [1.7.2001 19:29:45]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:29:54]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_16.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_16.gif [1.7.2001 19:30:04]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_18.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_18.gif [1.7.2001 19:30:10]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_19.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_19.gif [1.7.2001 19:30:19]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_20.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_20.gif [1.7.2001 19:30:37]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_21.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_21.gif [1.7.2001 19:30:45]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_22.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_22.gif [1.7.2001 19:31:07]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_23.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_23.gif [1.7.2001 19:31:16]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_24.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_24.gif [1.7.2001 19:31:24]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_25.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_25.gif [1.7.2001 19:31:29]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_26.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_26.gif [1.7.2001 19:31:35]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_28.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f10_28.gif [1.7.2001 19:31:45]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         Memory Management
         This chapter discusses the basic strategies whereby memory space can be reused, or
         shared by different objects that grow and shrink in arbitrary ways. For example, we
         shall discuss methods that maintain linked lists of available space, and "garbage
         collection" techniques, where we figure out what is available only when it seems we
         have run out of available space.


         12.1 Issues in Memory Management
         There are numerous situations in computer system operation when a limited memory
         resource is managed, that is, shared among several "competitors." A programmer
         who does not engage in the implementation of systems programs (compilers,
         operating systems, and so on) may be unaware of such activities, since they
         frequently are carried out "behind the scenes." As a case in point, Pascal
         programmers are aware that the procedure new(p) will make pointer p point to a new
         object of the correct type. But where does space for that object come from? The
         procedure new has access to a large region of memory, called the "heap," that the
         program variables do not use. From that region, an unused block of consecutive
         bytes sufficient to hold an object of the type that p points to is selected, and p is
         made to hold the address of the first byte of that block. But how does the procedure
         new know which bytes of the memory are "unused'"? Section 12.4 suggests the
         answer.

            Even more mysterious is what happens if the value of p is changed, either by an
         assignment or by another call to new(p). The block of memory p pointed to may now
         be inaccessible, in the sense that there is no way to get to it through the program's
         data structures, and we could reuse its space. On the other hand, before p was
         changed, the value of p may have been copied into some other variable. In that case,
         the memory block is still part of the program's data structures. How do we know
         whether a block in the memory region used by procedure new is no longer needed by
         the program?

            Pascal's sort of memory management is only one of several different types. For
         example, in some situations, like Pascal, objects of different sizes share the same
         memory space. In others, all objects sharing the space are of the same size. This
         distinction regarding object sizes is one way we can classify the kinds of memory
         management problems we face. Some more examples follow.

               1. In the programming language Lisp, memory space is divided into cells, which



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (1 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




                  are essentially records consisting of two fields; each field can hold either an
                  atom (object of elementary type, e.g., an integer) or a pointer to a cell. Atoms
                  and pointers are the same size, so all cells require the same number of bytes.
                  All known data structures can be made out of these cells. For example, linked
                  lists of atoms can use the first fields of cells to hold atoms and second fields
                  to hold pointers to the next cells on the list. Binary trees can be represented by
                  using the first field of each cell to point to the left child and the second field
                  to point to the right child. As a Lisp program runs, the memory space used to
                  hold a cell may find itself part of many different structures at different times,
                  either because one cell is moved among structures, or because the cell
                  becomes detached from all structures and its space is reused.
               2. A file system generally divides secondary storage devices, like disks, into
                  fixed length blocks. For example, UNIX typically uses blocks of 512 bytes.
                  Files are stored in a sequence of (not necessarily consecutive) blocks. As files
                  are created and destroyed, blocks of secondary storage are made available to
                  be reused.
               3. A typical multiprogramming operating system allows several programs to
                  share main memory at one time. Each program has a required amount of
                  memory, which is known to the operating system, that requirement being part
                  of the request for service issued when it is desired to run the program. While
                  in examples (1) and (2), the objects sharing memory (cells and blocks,
                  respectively) were each of the same size, different programs require different
                  amounts of memory. Thus, when a program using say 100K bytes terminates,
                  it may be replaced by two programs using 50K each, or one using 20K and
                  another 70K (with 10K left unused). Alternatively, the 100K bytes freed by
                  the program terminating may be combined with an adjacent 50K that are
                  unused and a program needing up to 150K may be run. Another possibility is
                  that no new program can fit in the space made available, and that 100K bytes
                  is left free temporarily.
               4. There are a large number of programming languages, like Snobol, APL, or
                  SETL, that allocate space to objects of arbitrary size. These objects, which are
                  values assigned to variables, are allocated a block of space from a larger
                  block of memory, which is often called the heap. When a variable changes
                  value, the new value is allocated space in the heap, and a pointer for the
                  variable is set to point to the new value. Possibly the old value of the variable
                  is now unused, and its space can be reused. However, languages like Snobol
                  or SETL implement assignments like A = B by making the pointer for A point
                  to the same object that B's pointer points to. If either A or B is reassigned, the
                  previous object is not freed, and its space cannot be reclaimed.

         Example 12.1. In Fig. 12.1(a) we see the heap that might be used by a Snobol
         program with three variables, A, B, and C. The value of any variable in Snobol is a
         character string, and in this case, the value of both A and B is 'OH HAPPY DAY' and



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (2 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         the value of C is 'PASS THE SALT'.

            We have chosen to represent character strings by pointers to blocks of memory in
         the heap. These blocks have their first 2 bytes (the number 2 is a typical value that
         could be changed) devoted to an integer giving the length of the string. For example,
         'OH HAPPY DAY' has length 12, counting the blanks between words, so the value
         of A (and of B) occupies 14 bytes.

            If the value of B were changed to 'OH HAPPY DAZE', we would find an empty
         block in the heap 15 bytes long to store the new value of B, including the 2 bytes for
         the length. The pointer for B is made to point to the new value, as shown in Fig.
         12.1(b). The block holding integer 12 and 'OH HAPPY DAY' is still useful, since A
         points to it. If the value of A now changes, that block would become useless and
         could be reused. How one tells conveniently that there are no pointers to such a
         block is a major subject of this chapter.




                                            Fig. 12.1. String variables in a heap.

             In the four examples above, we can see differences along at least two orthogonal
         "dimensions." The first issue is whether objects sharing storage are or are not of
         equal length. In the first two examples, Lisp programs and file storage, the objects,
         which are Lisp cells in one case and blocks holding parts of files in the other, are of
         the same size. This fact allows certain simplifications of the memory management
         problem. For example, in Lisp implementation, a region of memory is divided into
         spaces, each of which can hold exactly one cell. The management problem is to find
         empty spaces to hold newly-created cells, and it is never necessary to store a cell in
         such a position that it overlaps two spaces. Similarly, in the second example, a disk
         is divided into equal sized blocks, and each block is assigned to hold part of one file;
         we never use a block to store parts of two or more files, even if a file ends in the
         middle of a block.

            In contrast, the third and fourth examples, covering memory allocation by a
         multiprogramming system and heap management for those languages that deal with
         variables whose values are "big" objects, speak of allocating space in blocks of
         different sizes. This requirement presents certain problems that do not appear in the
         fixed-length case. For example, we fear fragmentation, a situation in which there is
         much unused space, but it is in such small pieces that space for one large object
         cannot be found. We shall say more about heap management in Sections 12.4 and



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (3 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         12.5.

             The second major issue is whether garbage collection, a charming term for the
         recovery of unused space, is done explicitly or implicitly, that is, by program
         command or only in response to a request for space that cannot be satisfied
         otherwise. In the case of file management, when a file is deleted, the blocks used to
         hold it are known to the file system. For example, the file system could record the
         address of one or more "master blocks" for each file in existence; the master blocks
         list the addresses of all the blocks used for the file. Thus, when a file is deleted, the
         file system can explicitly make available for reuse all the blocks used for that file.

            In contrast, Lisp cells, when they become detached from the data structures of the
         program, continue to occupy their memory space. Because of the possibility of
         multiple pointers to a cell, we cannot tell when a cell is completely detached;
         therefore we cannot explicitly collect cells as we do blocks of a deleted file.
         Eventually, all memory spaces will become allocated to useful or useless cells, and
         the next request for space for another cell implicitly will trigger a "garbage
         collection." At that time, the Lisp interpreter marks all the useful cells, by an
         algorithm such as the one we shall discuss in Section 12.3, and then links all the
         blocks holding useless cells into an available space list, so they can be reused.

            Figure 12.2 illustrates the four kinds of memory management and gives an
         example of each. We have already discussed the fixed block size examples in Fig.
         12.2. The management of main memory by a multiprogramming system is an
         example of explicit reclamation of variable length blocks. That is, when a program
         terminates, the operating system, knowing what area of memory was given to the
         program, and knowing no other program could be using that space, makes the space
         available immediately to another program.

            The management of a heap in Snobol or many other languages is an example of
         variable length blocks with garbage collection. As for Lisp, a typical Snobol
         interpreter does not try to reclaim blocks of memory until it runs out of space. At that
         time the interpreter performs a garbage collection as the Lisp interpreter does, but
         with the additional possibility that strings will be moved around the heap to reduce
         fragmentation, and that adjacent free blocks will be combined to make larger blocks.
         Notice that the latter two steps are pointless in the Lisp environment.




                        Fig. 12.2. Examples of the four memory management strategies.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (4 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         12.2 Managing Equal-Sized Blocks
         Let us imagine we have a program that manipulates cells each consisting of a pair of
         fields; each field can be a pointer to a cell or can hold an "atom." The situation, of
         course, is like that of a program written in Lisp, but the program may be written in
         almost any programming language, even Pascal, if we define cells to be of a variant
         record type. Empty cells available for incorporation into a data structure are kept on
         an available space list, and each program variable is represented by a pointer to a
         cell. The cell pointed to may be one cell of a large data structure.

         Example 12.2. In Fig. 12.3 we see a possible structure. A, B, and C are variables;
         lower case letters represent atoms. Notice some interesting phenomena. The cell
         holding atom a is pointed to by the variable A and by another cell. The cell holding
         atom c is pointed to by two different cells. The cells holding g and h are unusual in
         that although each points to the other, they cannot be reached from any of the
         variables A, B, or C, nor are they on the available space list.

            Let us assume that as the program runs, new cells may on occasion be seized from
         the available space list. For example, we might wish to have the null pointer in the
         cell with atom c in Fig. 12.3 replaced by a pointer to a new cell that holds atom i and
         a null pointer. This cell will be removed from the top of the available space list. It is
         also possible that from time to time, pointers will change in such a way that cells
         become detached from the program variables, as the cells holding g and h in Fig.
         12.3 have been. For example, the cell holding c may, at one time, have pointed to the
         cell holding g. As another example, the value of variable B may at some time
         change, which would, if nothing else has changed, detach the cell now pointed to by
         B in Fig. 12.3 and also detach the cell holding d and e (but not the cell holding c,
         since it would still be reached from A). We call cells not reachable from any variable
         and not on the available space list inaccessible.




                                                Fig. 12.3. A network of cells.

            When cells are detached, and therefore are no longer needed by the program, it
         would be nice if they found their way back onto the available space list, so they
         could be reused. If we don't reclaim such cells, we shall eventually reach the
         unacceptable situation where the program is not using all the cells, yet it wants a cell



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (5 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         from available space, and the available space list is empty. It is then that a time-
         consuming garbage collection must be performed. This garbage collection step is
         "implicit," in the sense that it was not explicitly called for by the request for space.


         Reference Counts
         One seemingly attractive approach to detecting inaccessible cells is to include in
         each cell a reference count, that is, an integer-valued field whose value equals the
         number of pointers to the cell. It is easy to maintain reference counts. When making
         some pointer point to a cell, add one to the reference count for that cell. When a non-
         null pointer is reassigned, first decrease by one the reference count for the cell
         pointed to. If a reference count reaches zero, the cell is inaccessible, and it can be
         returned to the available list.

            Unfortunately, reference counts don't always work. The cells with g and h in Fig.
         12.3 are inaccessible cells linked in a cycle. Their reference counts are each 1, so we
         would not return them to the available list. One can attempt to detect cycles of
         inaccessible cells in a variety of ways, but it is probably not worth doing so.
         Reference counts are useful for structures that do not have pointer cycles. One
         example of a structure with no possibility of cycles is a collection of variables
         pointing to blocks holding data, as in Fig. 12. I. There, we can do explicit garbage
         collection simply by collecting a block when its reference count reaches zero.
         However, when data structures allow pointer cycles, the reference count strategy is
         usually inferior, both in terms of the space needed in cells and the time taken dealing
         with the issue of inaccessible cells, to another approach which we shall discuss in the
         next section.


         12.3 Garbage Collection Algorithms for
         Equal-Sized Blocks
         Let us now give an algorithm for finding which of a collection of cells of the types
         suggested in Fig. 12.3 are accessible from the program variables. We shall define the
         setting for the problem precisely by defining a cell type in Pascal that is a variant
         record type; the four variants, which we call PP, PA, AP, and AA, are determined by
         which of the two data fields are pointers and which are atoms. For example, PA
         means the left field is a pointer and the right field an atom. An additional boolean
         field in cells, called mark, indicates whether the cell has been found accessible. That
         is, by setting mark to true when garbage collecting, we "mark" the cell, indicating it
         is accessible. The important type definitions are shown in Fig. 12.4.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (6 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




           type
             atomtype = { some appropriate type;
                  preferably of the same size as pointers }
             patterns = (PP, PA, AP, AA);
             celltype = record
                 mark: boolean;
                 case pattern: patterns of
                    PP: (left: ↑ celltype; right:
         ↑ celltype);
                    PA: (left: ↑ celltype; right:
         atomtype);
                    AP: (left: atomtype; right: ↑ celltype);
                    AA: (left: atomtype; right: atomtype);
           end;

                                        Fig. 12.4. Definition of the type for cells.

            We assume there is an array of cells, taking up most of the memory, and some
         collection of variables, that are pointers to cells. For simplicity, we assume there is
         only one variable, called source, pointing to a cell, but the extension to many
         variables is not hard. † That is, we declare


                var
                  source: ↑ celltype;
                  memory: array [1..memorysize ] of celltype;


             To mark the cells accessible from source, we first "unmark" all cells, accessible
         or not, by running down the array memory and setting the mark field to false. Then
         we perform a depth-first search of the graph emanating from source, marking all
         cells visited. The cells visited are exactly those that are accessible. We then traverse
         the array memory and add to the available space list all unmarked cells. Figure 12.5
         shows a procedure dfs to perform the depth-first search; dfs is called by the
         procedure collect that unmarks all cells, and then marks accessible cells by calling
         dfs. We do not show the code linking the available space list because of the
         peculiarities of Pascal. For example, while we could link available cells using either
         all left or all right cells, since pointers and atoms are assumed the same size, we are
         not permitted to replace atoms by pointers in cells of variant type AA.


         (1) procedure dfs ( currentcell: ↑



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (7 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         celltype );
                { If current cell was marked, do nothing. Otherwise, mark
                it and call dfs on any cells pointed to by the current cell }
               begin
         (2)       with currentcell↑ do
         (3)          if mark = false then begin
         (4)             mark := true;
         (5)             if (pattern = PP ) or (pattern = PA ) then
         (6)                 if left <> nil then
         (7)                     dfs (left);
         (8)             if (pattern = PP ) or (pattern = AP ) then
         (9)                 if right <> nil then
         (10)                     dfs (right)
                  end
               end; { dfs }

         (11) procedure collect;
                var
                   i: integer;
                begin
         (12)        for i := 1 to memorysize do { "unmark"
         all cells }
         (13)            memory[i].mark := false;
         (14)        dfs(source); { mark accessible cells }
         (15)        { the code for the collection goes here }
                end; { collect }

                                  Fig. 12.5. Algorithm for marking accessible cells.


         Collection in Place
         The algorithm of Fig. 12.5 has a subtle flaw. In a computing environment where
         memory is limited, we may not have the space available to store the stack required
         for recursive calls to dfs. As discussed in Section 2.6, each time dfs calls itself,
         Pascal (or any other language permitting recursion) creates on "activation record" for
         that particular call to dfs. In general, an activation record contains space for
         parameters and variables local to the procedure, of which each call needs its own
         copy. Also necessary in each activation record is a "return address," the place to
         which control must go when this recursive call to the procedure terminates.

            In the particular case of dfs, we only need space for the parameter and the return
         address (i.e., was it called by line (14) in collect or by line (7) or line (10) of another



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (8 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         invocation of dfs). However, this space requirement is enough that, should all of
         memory be linked in a single chain extending from source (and therefore the number
         of active calls to dfs would at some time equal the length of this chain), considerably
         more space would be required for the stack of activation records than was allotted for
         memory. Should such space not be available, it would be impossible to carry out the
         marking.

             Fortunately, there is a clever algorithm, known as the Deutsch-Schorr-Waite
         Algorithm, for doing the marking "in place." The reader should convince himself that
         the sequence of cells upon which a call to dfs has been made but not yet terminated
         indeed forms a path from source to the cell upon which the current call to dfs was
         made. Thus we can use a nonrecursive version of dfs, and instead of a stack of
         activation records to record the path of cells from source to the cell currently being
         examined, we can use the pointer fields along that path to hold the path itself. That
         is, each cell on the path, except the last, holds in either the left or right field, a
         pointer to its predecessor, the cell immediately closer to source. We shall describe
         the Deutsch-Schorr-Waite algorithm with an extra, one-bit field, called back. Field
         back is of an enumerated type (L, R), and tells whether field left or field right points
         to the predecessor. Later, we shall discuss how the information in back can be held in
         the pattern field, so no extra space in cells is required.

            The new procedure for nonrecursive depth-first search, which we call nrdfs, uses
         a pointer current to point to the current cell, and a pointer previous to the
         predecessor of the current cell. The variable source points to a cell source1, which
         has a pointer in its right field only.† Before marking, source1 is initialized to have
         back = R, and its right field pointing to itself. The cell ordinarily pointed to by
         source1, is pointed to by current, and source1 is pointed to by previous. We halt the
         marking operation when current = previous, which can only occur when they both
         point to source1, the entire structure having been searched.

         Example 12.3. Figure 12.6(a) shows a possible structure emanating from source. If
         we depth-first search this structure, we visit (1), (2), (3) and (4), in that order. Figure
         12.6(b) shows the pointer modifications made when cell (4) is current. The value of
         the back field is shown, although fields mark and pattern are not. The current path is
         from (4) to (3) to (2) to (1) back to sourcel; it is represented by dashed pointers. For
         example, cell (1) has back = L, since the left field of (1), which in Fig. 12.6(a) held a
         pointer to (2), is being used in Fig. 12.6(b) to hold part of the path. Now the left field
         in (1) points backwards, rather than forwards along the path; however, we shall
         restore that pointer when the depth-first search finally retreats from cell (2) back to
         (1). Similarly, in cell (2), back = R, and the right field of (2) points backwards along
         the path to (1), rather than ahead to (3), as it did in Fig. 12.6(a).




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (9 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




                          Fig. 12.6. Using pointers to represent the path back to source.

              There are three basic steps to performing the depth-first search. They are:

               1. Advance. If we determine that the current cell has one or more nonnull
                  pointers, advance to the first of these, that is, follow the pointer in left, or if
                  there is none, the pointer in right. By "advance," we mean to make the cell
                  pointed to become the current cell and the current cell become previous. To
                  help find the way back, the pointer just followed is made to point to the old
                  previous cell. These changes are shown in Fig. 12.7(a), on the assumption that
                  the left pointer is followed. In that figure, the old pointers are solid lines and
                  the new ones dashed.
               2. Switch. If we determine that the cells emanating from the current cell have
                  been searched (for example, the current cell may have only atoms, may be
                  marked, or we may just have "retreated" to the current cell from the cell
                  pointed to by the right field of the current cell), we consult the field back of
                  the previous cell. If that value is L, and the right field of the previous cell
                  holds a nonnull pointer to some cell C, we make C become the current cell,
                  while the identity of the previous cell is not changed. However, the value of
                  back in the previous cell is set to R, and the left pointer in that cell receives its
                  correct value; that is, it is made to point to the old current cell. To maintain
                  the path back to source from the previous cell, the pointer to C in field right is
                  made to point where left used to point. Figure 12.7(b) shows these changes.
               3. Retreat. If we determine, as in (2), that the cells emanating from the current
                  cell have been searched, but field back of the previous cell is R, or it is L but
                  field right holds an atom or null pointer, then we have now searched all cells
                  emanating from the previous cell. We retreat, by making the previous cell be
                  the current cell and the next cell along the path from the previous cell to
                  source be the new previous cell. These changes are shown in Fig. 12.7(c), on
                  the assumption that back = R in the previous cell.

            One fortuitous coincidence is that each of the steps of Fig. 12.7 can be viewed as
         the simultaneous rotation of three pointers. For example, in Fig. 12.7(a), we
         simultaneously replace (previous, current, current↑.left) by (current, current↑.left,
         previous), respectively. The simultaneity must be emphasized; the location of
         current↑.left does not change when we assign a new value to current. To perform
         these pointer modifications, a procedure rotate, shown in Fig. 12.8, is naturally


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (10 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         useful. Note especially that the passing of parameters by reference assures that the
         locations of the pointers are established before any values change.

            Now we turn to the design of the nonrecursive marking procedure nrdfs. This
         procedure is one of these odd processes that is most easily understood when written
         with labels and gotos. Particularly, there are two "states" of the procedure,
         "advancing," represented by label 1, and "retreating," represented by label 2. We
         enter the first state initially, and also whenever we have moved to a new cell, either
         by an advance step or a switch step. In this state, we attempt another advance step,
         and only retreat or switch if we are blocked. We can be blocked for two reasons: (l)
         The cell just reached is already marked, or (2) there are no nonnull pointers in the
         cell. When blocked, we change to the second, or "retreating" state.




                                                 Fig. 12.7. Three basic steps.


                procedure rotate ( var p1, p2, p3: ↑ celltype );
                  var
                    temp: ↑ celltype;
                  begin
                    temp := p1;
                    p1 := p2;
                    p2 := p3;
                    p3 := temp
                  end; { rotate }

                                       Fig. 12.8. Pointer modification procedure.

            The second state is entered whenever we retreat, or when we cannot stay in the
         advancing state because we are blocked. In the retreating state we check whether we
         have retreated back to the dummy cell source1. As discusssed before, we shall
         recognize this situation because previous = current, in which case we go to state 3.
         Otherwise, we decide whether to retreat and stay in the retreating state or switch and
         enter the advancing state. The code for nrdfs is shown in Fig. 12.9. It makes use of
         functions blockleft, blockright, and block, which test if the left or right fields of a
         cell, or both, have an atom or null pointer. block also checks for a marked cell.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (11 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




           function blockleft ( cell: celltype ): boolean;
             { test if left field is atom or null pointer }
             begin
                 with cell do
                   if (pattern = PP) or (pattern = PA)
         then
                      if left <> nil then return (false);
                 return (true)
             end; { blockleft }
           function blockright ( cell : celltype ): boolean;
             { test if right field is atom or null pointer }
             begin
                 with cell do
                   if (pattern = PP) or (pattern = AP)
         then
                      if right <> nil then
                          return (false);
                 return (true)
             end; { blockright }

           function block ( cell: celltype ): boolean;
             { test if cell is marked or contains no nonnull pointers }
             begin
                if (cell.mark = true) or blockleft (cell) and
         blockright (cell) then
                   return (true)
                else
                   return (false)
             end; { block }
           procedure nrdfs; { marks cells accessible from source }
             var
                current, previous: ↑ celltype;
             begin { initialize }
                  current := source 1↑.right; { cell
         pointed to by source1 }
                  previous := source 1; { previous points to source1 }
                  source 1↑.back := R;
                  source 1↑.right := source 1; {
         source1 points to itself }
                  source 1↑.mark := true;

            state 1: { try to advance }



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (12 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




             if block (current↑) then begin
         { prepare to retreat }
                current↑.mark := true;
                goto state2
             end
             else begin { mark and advance }
                current↑.mark := true;
                if blockleft (current↑) then
         begin { follow right pointer }
                   current↑.back := R;
                   rotate(previous, current, current↑.right); { implements
                     changes of Fig. 12.7(a), but following right pointer }
                   goto state1
                end
                else begin { follow left pointer }
                   current↑.back := L;
                   rotate (previous, current, current↑.left);
                      { implements changes of Fig. 12.7(a) }
                   goto state1
                end
             end;

           state2: { finish, retreat or switch }
              if previous = current then { finish }
                 goto state3
              else if (previous↑.back = L )
         and
                   not blockright (previous↑) then
         begin { switch }
                      previous↑.back := R;
                      rotate (previous↑.left,
         current, previous↑.right);
                          { implements changes of Fig. 12.7(b) }
                      goto state1
                   end
              else if previous↑.back = R
         then { retreat }
                 rotate (previous, previous↑.right, current)
                   { implements changes of Fig. 12.7(c) }
              else { previous↑.back = L }
                 rotate (previous, previous↑.left,
         current);



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (13 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




                  { implements changes of Fig. 12.7(c), but with
                      left field of previous cell involved in the path }
               goto state2
               end;

            state3: { put code to link unmarked cells on available list here }
            end; { nrdfs }

                                      Fig. 12.9. Nonrecursive marking algorithm.


         Deutsch-Schorr-Waite Algorithm Without
         an Extra Bit for the Field Back
         It is possible, although unlikely, that the extra bit used in cells for the field back
         might cause cells to require an extra byte, or even an extra word. In such a case, it is
         comforting to know that we do not really need the extra bit, at least not if we are
         programming in a language that, unlike Pascal, allows the bits of the field pattern to
         be used for purposes other than those for which they were declared: designators of
         the variant record format. The "trick" is to observe that if we are using the field back
         at all, because its cell is on the path back to source1, then the possible values of field
         pattern are restricted. For example, if back = L, then we know the pattern must be PP
         or PA, since evidently the field left holds a pointer. A similar observation can be
         made when back = R. Thus, if we have two bits available to represent both pattern
         and (when needed) back, we can encode the necessary information as in Fig. 12.10,
         for example.

            The reader should observe that in the program of Fig. 12.9, we always know
         whether back is in use, and thus can tell which of the interpretations in Fig. 12.10 is
         applicable. Simply, when current points to a record, the field back in that record is
         not in use; when previous points to it, it is. Of course, as these pointers move, we
         must adjust the codes. For example, if current points to a cell with bits 10, which we
         interpret according to Fig. 12.10 as pattern = AP, and we decide to advance, so
         previous will now point to this cell, we make back=R, as only the right field holds a
         pointer, and the appropriate bits are 11. Note that if the pattern were AA, which has
         no representation in the middle column of Fig. 12.10, we could not possibly want
         previous to point to the cell, as there are no pointers to follow in an advancing move.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (14 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




                                Fig. 12.10. Interpreting two bits as pattern and back.


         12.4 Storage Allocation for Objects with
         Mixed Sizes
         Let us now consider the management of a heap, as typified by Fig. 12.1, where there
         is a collection of pointers to allocated blocks. The blocks hold data of some type. In
         Fig. 12.1, for example, the data are character strings. While the type of data stored in
         the heap need not be character strings, we assume the data contain no pointers to
         locations within the heap.

            The problem of heap management has aspects that make it both easier and harder
         than the maintenance of list structures of equal-sized cells as discussed in the
         previous section. The principal factor making the problem easier is that marking used
         blocks is not a recursive process; one has only to follow the external pointers to the
         heap and mark the blocks pointed to. There is no need for a depth-first search of a
         linked structure or for anything like the Deutsch-Schorr-Waite algorithm.

            On the other hand, managing the available space list is not as simple as in Section
         12.3. We might imagine that the empty regions (there are three empty regions in Fig.
         12.1(a), for example) are linked together as suggested in Fig. 12.11. There we see a
         heap of 3000 words divided into five blocks. Two blocks of 200 and 600 words, hold
         the values of X and Y. The remaining three blocks are empty, and are linked in a
         chain emanating from avail, the header for available space.




                                      Fig. 12.11. A heap with available space list.

            In order that empty blocks may be found when they are needed to hold new data,
         and blocks holding useless data may be made available, we shall throughout this
         section make the following assumptions about blocks.

               1. Each block is sufficiently large to hold
                     a. A count indicating the size (in bytes or words, as appropriate for the
                        computer system) of the block,
                     b. A pointer (to link the block in available space), plus
                     c. A bit to indicate whether the block is empty or not. This bit is referred
                        to as the full/empty or used/unused bit.


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (15 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




               2. An empty block has, from the left (low address end), a count indicating its
                  length, a full/empty bit with a value of 0, indicating emptiness of the block, a
                  pointer to the next available block, and empty space.
               3. A block holding data has, from the left, a count, a full/empty bit with value 1
                  indicating the block is in use, and the data itself.†

             One interesting consequence of the above assumptions is that blocks must be
         capable of storing data sometimes (when in use) and pointers at other times (when
         unused) in precisely the same place. It is thus impossible or very inconvenient to
         write programs that manipulate blocks of the kind we propose in Pascal or any other
         strongly typed language. Thus, this section must of necessity be discursive; only
         pseudo-Pascal programs can be written, never real Pascal programs. However, there
         is no problem writing programs to do the things we describe in assembly languages
         or in most systems programming languages such as C.


         Fragmentation and Compaction of Empty
         Blocks
         To see one of the special problems that heap management presents, let us suppose
         that the variable Y of Fig. 12.11 changes, so the block representing Y must be
         returned to available space. We can most easily insert the new block at the beginning
         of the available list, as suggested by Fig. 12.12. In that figure, we see an instance of
         fragmentation, the tendency for large empty areas to be represented on the available
         space list by "fragments," that is, several small blocks making up the whole. In the
         case in point, the last 2300 bytes of the heap in Fig. 12.12 are empty, yet the space is
         divided into three blocks of 1000, 600, and 700 bytes, and these blocks are not even
         in consecutive order on the available list. Without some form of garbage collection,
         it would be impossible to satisfy a request for, say, a block of 2000 bytes.




                                        Fig. 12.12. After returning the block of Y.

             Evidently, when returning a block to available space it would be desirable to look
         at the blocks to the immediate left and right of the block being made available.
         Finding the block to the right is easy. If the block being returned begins at position p
         and has count c, the block to the right begins at position p+c. If we know p (for
         example, the pointer Y in Fig. 12.11 holds the value p for the block made available in
         Fig. 12.12), we have only to read the bytes starting at position p, as many as are used



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (16 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         for holding c, to obtain the value c. From byte p+c, we skip over the count field to
         find the bit that tells whether or not the block is empty. If empty, the blocks
         beginning at p and p + c can be combined.

         Example 12.4. Let us assume the heap of Fig. 12.11 begins at position 0. Then the
         block for Y being returned begins in byte 1700, so p=1700 and c=600. The block
         beginning at p+c=2300 is also empty so we could combine them into one block
         beginning at 1700 with a count of 1300, the sum of the counts in the two blocks.

            It is, however, not so easy to fix the available list after combining blocks. We can
         create the combined block by simply adding the count of the second block to c.
         However, the second block will still be linked in the available list and must be
         removed. To do so requires finding the pointer to that block from its predecessor on
         the available list. Several strategies present themselves; none is strongly
         recommended over the others.

               1. Run down the available list until we find a pointer with value p+c. This
                  pointer must be in the predecessor block of the block we have combined with
                  its neighbor. Replace the pointer found by the pointer in the block at p+c.
                  This effectively eliminates the block beginning at position p+c from the
                  available list. Its space is still available, of course; it is part of the block
                  beginning at p. On the average, we shall have to scan half the available list, so
                  the time taken is proportional to that length.
               2. Use a doubly-linked available space list. Then the predecessor block can be
                  found quickly and the block at p+c eliminated from the list. This approach
                  takes constant time, independent of the length of the available list, but it
                  requires extra space for another pointer in each empty block, thus increasing
                  the minimum size for a block to that required to hold a count, a full/empty bit,
                  and two pointers.
               3. Keep the available space list sorted by position. Then we know the block at
                  position p is the predecessor on the available list of the block at p+c, and the
                  pointer manipulation necessary to eliminate the second block can be done in
                  constant time. However, insertion of a new available block requires a scan of
                  half the available list on the average, and is thus no more efficient than
                  method (1).

            Of the three methods, all but the second require time proportional to the length of
         the available list to return a block to available space and combine it with its right
         neighbor if that neighbor is empty. This time may or may not be prohibitive,
         depending on how long the list gets and what fraction of the total program time is
         spent manipulating the heap. The second method - doubly linking the available list -
         has only the penalty of an increased minimum size for blocks. Unfortunately, when



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (17 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         we consider how to combine a returned block with its neighbor to the left, we see
         that double linking, like the other methods, is no help in finding left neighbors in less
         than the time it takes to scan the available list.

            To find the block immediately to the left of the block in question is not so easy.
         The position p of a block and its count c, while they determine the position of the
         block to the right, give no clue as to where the block to the left begins. We need to
         find an empty block that begins in some position p1, and has a count c1, such that
         p1+c1=p. It ap>

               1. Scan the available list for a block at position p1 and count c1 where p1+c1=p.
                  This operation takes time proportional to the length of the available list.
               2. Keep a pointer in each block (used or unused) indicating the position of the
                  block to the left. This approach allows us to find the block to the left in
                  constant time; we can check whether it is empty and if so merge it with the
                  block in question. We can find the block at position p+c and make it point to
                  the beginning of the new block, so these left-going pointers can be
                  maintained.†
               3. Keep the available list sorted by position. Then the empty block to the left is
                  found when we insert the newly emptied block onto the list, and we have only
                  to check, using the position and count of the previous empty block, that no
                  nonempty blocks intervene.

            As with the merger of a newly empty block with the block to its right, the first
         and third approaches to finding and merging with the block on the left require time
         proportional to the length of the available list. Method (2) again requires constant
         time, but it has a disadvantage beyond the problems involved with doubly linking the
         available list (which we suggested in connection with finding right neighbor blocks).
         While doubly linking the empty blocks raises the minimum block size, the approach
         cannot be said to waste space, since it is only blocks not used for storing data that get
         linked. However, pointing to left neighbors requires a pointer in used blocks as well
         as unused ones, and can justifiably be accused of wasting space. If the average block
         size is hundreds of bytes, the extra space for a pointer may be negligible. On the
         other hand, the extra space may be prohibitive if the typical block is only l0 bytes
         long.

            To summarize the implications of our explorations regarding the question of how
         we might merge newly empty blocks with empty neighbors, we see three approaches
         to handling fragmentation.

               1. Use one of several approaches, such as keeping the available list sorted, that
                  requires time proportional to the length of the available list each time a block


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (18 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




                  becomes unused, but enables us to find and merge empty neighbors.
               2. Use a doubly linked available space list each time a block becomes unused,
                  and also use left-neighbor pointers in all blocks, whether available or not, to
                  merge empty neighbors in constant time.
               3. Do nothing explicit to merge empty neighbors. When we cannot find a block
                  large enough to hold a new data item, scan the blocks from left to right,
                  merging empty neighbors and then creating a new available list. A sketched
                  program to do this is shown in Fig. 12.13.


         (1) procedure merge;
             var
         (2) p, q: pointers to blocks;
              { p indicates left end of empty block being accumulated.
               q indicates a block to the right of p that we
               shall incorporate into block p if empty }
             begin
         (3) p:= leftmost block of heap;
         (4) make available list empty;
         (5) while p < right end of heap do
         (6) if p points to a full block with count c then
         (7)       p := p + c { skip over full blocks }
         (8) else begin { p points to the beginning
                  of a sequence of empty blocks; merge them }
         (9)       q := p + c; { initialize q to the next block }
         (10)       while q points to an empty block with some
                     count, say d, and q < right end of heap do begin
         (11)          add d to count of the block pointed to by p;
         (12)          q := q + d
                     end;
         (13)       insert block pointed to by p onto the available list;
         (14)       p := q
                 end
            end; { merge }

                                      Fig. 12.13. Merging adjacent empty blocks.

         Example 12.5. As an example, consider the program of Fig. 12.13 applied to the
         heap of Fig. 12.12. Assume the leftmost byte of the heap is 0, so initially p=0. As
         c=500 for the first block, q is initialized to p + c=500. As the block beginning at 500
         is full, the loop of lines (10)-(12) is not executed and the block consisting of bytes 0-
         499 is attached to the available list, by making avail point to byte 0 and putting a nil
         pointer in the designated place in that block (right after the count and full/empty bit).


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (19 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         Then p is given the value 500 at line (14), and incremented to 700 at line (7). Pointer
         q is given value 1700 at line (9), then 2300 and 3000 at line (12), while at the same
         time, 600 and 700 are added to count 1000 in the block beginning at 700. As q
         exceeds the rightmost byte, 2999, the block beginning at 700, which now has count
         2300, is inserted onto the available list. Then at line (14), p is set to 3000, and the
         outer loop ends at line (5).

            As the total number of blocks and the number of available blocks are likely not to
         be too dissimilar, and the frequency with which no sufficiently large empty block
         can be found is likely to be low, we believe that method (3), doing the merger of
         adjacent empty blocks only when we run out of adequate space, is superior to (1) in
         any realistic situation. Method (2) is a possible competitor, but if we consider the
         extra space requirement and the fact that extra time is needed each time a block is
         inserted or deleted from the available list, we believe that (2) is preferable to (3) in
         extremely rare circumstances, and can probably be forgotten.


         Selecting Available Blocks
         We have discussed in detail what should happen when a block is no longer needed
         and can be returned to available space. There is also the inverse process of providing
         blocks to hold new data items. Evidently we must select some available block and
         use some or all of it to hold the new data. There are two issues to address. First,
         which empty block do we select? Second, if we must use only part of the selected
         block, which part do we use?

             The second issue can be dispensed with easily. If we are to use a block with count
         c, and we need d<c bytes from that block, we choose the last d bytes. In this way, we
         need only to replace count c by c - d, and the remaining empty block can stay as it is
         in the available list.†

         Example 12.6. Suppose we need 400 bytes for variable W in the situation
         represented by Fig. 12.12. We might choose to take the 400 bytes out of the 600 in
         the first block on the available list. The situation would then be as shown in Fig.
         12.14.

            Choosing a block in which to place the new data is not so easy, since there are
         conflicting goals for such strategies. We desire, on one hand, to be able to quickly
         pick an empty block in which to hold our data and, on the other hand, to make a
         selection of an empty block that will minimize the fragmentation. Two strategies that
         represent extremes in the spectrum are known as "first-fit" and "best-fit." They are
         described below.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (20 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




               1. First-Fit. To follow the first-fit strategy, when we need a block of size d, scan
                  the available list from the beginning until we come to a block of size




                                                 Fig. 12.14. Memory configuration.

                  c ≥ d. Utilize the last d words of this block, as we have described above.
               2. Best-fit. To follow the best-fit strategy, when we need a block of size d,
                  examine the entire available list to find that block of size at least d, whose
                  size is as little greater than d as is possible. Seize the last d words of this
                  block.

            Some observations about these strategies can be made. Best-fit is considerably
         slower than first-fit, since with the latter we can expect to find a fitting block fairly
         quickly on the average, while with best-fit, we are obliged to scan the entire
         available list. Best-fit can be speeded up if we keep separate available lists for blocks
         in various size ranges. For example, we could keep a list of available blocks between
         1 and 16 bytes in length,† from 17- 32, 33-64, and so on. This "improvement" does
         not speed up first-fit appreciably, and in fact may slow it down if the statistics of
         block sizes are bad. (Compare looking for the first block of size at least 32 on the full
         available list and on the list for blocks of size 17-32, e.g.) A last observation is that
         we can define a spectrum of strategies between first-fit and best-fit by looking for a
         best-fit among the first k available blocks for some fixed k.

             The best-fit strategy seems to reduce fragmentation compared with first-fit, in the
         sense that best-fit tends to produce very small "fragments", i.e., left-over blocks.
         While the number of these fragments is about the same as for first-fit, they tend to
         take up a rather small area. However, best-fit will not tend to produce "medium size
         fragments." Rather, the available blocks will tend to be either very small fragments
         or will be blocks returned to available space. As a consequence, there are sequences
         of requests that first-fit can satisfy but not best-fit, as well as vice-versa.

         Example 12.7. Suppose, as in Fig. 12.12, the available list consists of blocks of sizes
         600, 500, 1000, and 700, in that order. If we are using the first-fit strategy, and a
         request for a block of size 400 is made, we shall carve it from the block of size 600,
         that being the first on the list in which a block of size 400 fits. The available list now
         has blocks of size 200, 500, 1000, 700. We are thus unable to satisfy immediately
         three requests for blocks of size 600 (although we might be able to do so after
         merging adjacent empty blocks and/or moving utilized blocks around in the heap).



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (21 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




            However, if we were using the best-fit strategy with available list 600, 500, 1000,
         700, and the request for 400 came in, we would place it where it fit best, that is, in
         the block of 500, leaving a list of available blocks 600, 100, 1000, 700. We would, in
         that event, be able to satisfy three requests for blocks of size 600 without any form of
         storage reorganization.

            On the other hand, there are situations where, starting with the list 600, 500, 1000,
         700 again, best-fit would fail, while first-fit would succeed without storage
         reorganization. Let the first request be for 400 bytes. Best-fit would, as before, leave
         the list 600, 100, 1000, 700, while first-fit leaves 200, 500, 1000, 700. Suppose the
         next two requests are for 1000 and 700, so either strategy would allocate the last two
         empty blocks completely, leaving 600, 100 in the case of best-fit, and 200, 500 in the
         case of first-fit. Now, first-fit can honor requests for blocks of size 200 and 500,
         while best-fit obviously cannot.


         12.5 Buddy Systems
         There is a family of strategies for maintaining a heap that partially avoids the
         problems of fragmentation and awkward distribution of empty block sizes. These
         strategies, called "buddy systems," in practice spend very little time merging
         adjacent empty blocks. The disadvantage of buddy systems is that blocks come in a
         limited assortment of sizes, so we may waste some space by placing a data item in a
         bigger block than necessary.

            The central idea behind all buddy systems is that blocks come only in certain
         sizes; let us say that s1 < s2 < s3 < ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ < sk are all the sizes in which blocks can be
         found. Common choices for the sequence sl, s2, . . . are 1, 2, 4, 8, . . . (the exponential
         buddy system) and 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, . . . (the Fibonacci buddy system, where si+1 =
         si+si-1). All the empty blocks of size si are linked in a list, and there is an array of
         available list headers, one for each size si allowed.† If we require a block of size d
         for a new datum, we choose an available block of that size si such that si ≥ d, but si-1
         < d, that is, the smallest permitted size in which the new datum fits.

             Difficulties arise when no empty blocks of the desired size si exist. In that case,
         we find a block of size si+1 and split it into two, one of size si and the other of size
         si+1-si.† The buddy system constrains us that si+1 - si be some sj, for j ≤ i. We now
         see the way in which the choices of values for the si's are constrained. If we let j = i -
         k, for some k ≥ 0, then since si+1-si = si- k, it follows that




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (22 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




                          si+1 = si +
         si-k                     (12.1)

           Equation (12.1) applies when i > k, and together with values for s1, s2, . . . , sk,
         completely determines sk+1, sk+2, . . . . For example, if k = 0, (12.1) becomes


                          si+1 = 2si
         (12.2)

         Beginning with s1 = 1 in (12.2), we get the exponential sequence 1, 2, 4, 8, . . .. Of
         course no matter what value of s1 we start with, the s's grow exponentially in (12.2).
         As another example, if k=1, s1=1, and s2=2, ( 12. l ) becomes


                          si+1 = si +
         si-1                     (12.3)

         (12.3) defines the Fibonacci sequence: 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, . . ..

             Whatever value of k we choose in (12.1) we get a kth order buddy system. For any
         k, the sequence of permitted sizes grows exponentially; that is, the ratio si+1/si
         approximates some constant greater than one. For example, for k=0, si+1/si is exactly
         2. For k = 1 the ratio approximates the "golden ratio" ((√5+1)/2 = 1.618), and the
         ratio decreases as k increases, but never gets as low as 1.


         Distribution of Blocks
         In the kth order buddy system, each block of size si+1 may be viewed as consisting of
         a block of size si and one of size si- k. For specificity, let us suppose that the block of
         size si is to the left (in lower numbered positions) of the block of size si-k.‡ If we
         view the heap as a single block of size sn, for some large n, then the positions at
         which blocks of size si can begin are completely determined.

            The positions in the exponential, or 0th order, buddy system are easily
         determined. Assuming positions in the heap are numbered starting at 0, a block of
         size si begins at any position beginning with a multiple of 2i, that is, 0, 2i, . . ..



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (23 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         Moreover, each block of size 2i+1, beginning at say, j2i+1 is composed of two
         "buddies" of size 2i, beginning at positions (2j)2i, which is j2i+1, and (2j+1)2i. Thus
         it is easy to find the buddy of a block of size 2i. If it begins at some even multiple of
         2i, say (2j)2i, its buddy is to the right, at position (2j+1)2i. If it begins at an odd
         multiple of 2i, say (2j+1)2i, its buddy is to the left, at (2j)2i.

         Example 12.8. Matters are not so simple for buddy systems of order higher than 0.
         Figure 12.15 shows the Fibonacci buddy system used in a heap of size 55, with
         blocks of sizes s1, s2, . . ., s8 = 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, and 55. For example, the block
         of size 3 beginning at 26 is buddy to the block of size 5 beginning at 21; together
         they comprise the block of size 8 beginning at 21, which is buddy to the block of size
         5 beginning at 29. Together, they comprise the block of size 13 starting at 21, and so
         on.




                   Fig. 12.15. Division of a heap according to the Fibonacci buddy system.


         Allocating Blocks
         If we require a block of size n, we choose any one from the available list of blocks of
         size si, where si ≥ n and either i = 1 or si-1 < n; that is, we choose a best fitting block.
         In a kth order buddy system, if no blocks of size si exist, we may choose a block of
         size si+1 or si+k+1 to split, as one of the resulting blocks will be of size si in either
         case. If no blocks in either of these sizes exist, we may create one by applying this
         splitting strategy recursively for size si+1.

             There is a small catch, however. In a kth order system, we may not split blocks of
         size s1, s2, . . ., sk, since these would result in a block whose size is smaller than s1.
         Rather we must use the block whole, if no smaller block is available. This problem
         does not come up if k=0, i.e., in the exponential buddy system. It could be alleviated
         in the Fibonacci buddy system if we start with s1 = 1, but that choice may not be
         acceptable since blocks of size 1 (byte or word, perhaps) could be too small to hold a
         pointer and a full/empty bit.


         Returning Blocks to Available Storage


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (24 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:19]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         When a block becomes available for reuse, we can see one of the advantages of the
         buddy system. We can sometimes reduce fragmentation by combining the newly
         available block with its buddy, if the buddy is also available.† In fact, should that be
         the case, we can combine the resulting block with its buddy, if that buddy is empty,
         and so on. The combination of empty buddies takes only a constant amount of time,
         and thus is an attractive alternative to periodic mergers of adjacent empty blocks,
         suggested in the previous section, which takes time proportional to the number of
         empty blocks.

             The exponential buddy system makes the locating of buddies especially easy. If
         we have just returned the block of size 2i beginning at p2i, its buddy is at (p+1)2i if p
         is even, and at (p- 1)2i if p is odd.

            For a buddy system of order k ≥ 1, finding buddies is not that simple. To make it
         easier, we shall store certain pieces of information in each block.

               1. A full/empty bit, as every block has.
               2. The size index, which is that integer i such that the block is of size si.
               3. The left buddy count, described below.

             In each pair of buddies, one (the left buddy) is to the left of the other (the right
         buddy). Intuitively, the left buddy count of a block tells how many times
         consecutively it is all or part of a left buddy. Formally, the entire heap, treated as a
         block of size sn has a left buddy count of 0. When we divide any block of size si+1,
         with left buddy count b, into blocks of size si and si-k, which are the left and right
         buddies respectively, the left buddy gets a left buddy count of b+1, while the right
         gets a left buddy count of 0, independent of b. For example, in Fig. 12.15, the block
         of size 3 beginning at 0 has a left buddy count of 6, and the block of size 3 beginning
         at 13 has a left buddy count of 2.

            In addition to the above information, empty blocks, but not utilized ones, have
         forward and backward pointers for the available list of the appropriate size. The
         bidirectional pointers make mergers of buddies, which requires deletion from
         available lists, easy.

             The way we use this information is as follows. Suppose k is the order of the
         buddy system. Any block beginning at position p with a left buddy count of 0 is a
         right buddy. Thus, if it has size index j, its left buddy is of size sj+k and begins at
         position p - sj+k. If the left buddy count is greater than 0, then the block is left buddy
         to a block of size sj-k, which is located beginning at position p+sj.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (25 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




             If we combine a left buddy of size si, having a left buddy count of b, with a right
         buddy of size si-k, the resulting block has size index i+1, begins at the same position
         as the block of size si, and has a left buddy count b- 1. Thus, the necessary
         information can be maintained easily when we merge two empty buddies. The reader
         may check that the information can be maintained when we split an empty block of
         size si+1 into a used block of size si and an empty one of size si-k.

             If we maintain all this information, and link the available lists in both directions,
         we spend only a constant amount of time on each split of a block into buddies or
         merger of buddies into a larger block. Since the number of mergers can never exceed
         the number of splits, the total amount of work is proportional to the number of splits.
         It is not hard to recognize that most requests for an allocated block require no splits
         at all, since a block of the correct size is already available. However, there are bizarre
         situations where each allocation requires many splits. The most extreme example is
         where we repeatedly request a block of the smallest size, then return it. If there are n
         different sizes, we require at least n/k splits in a kth order buddy system, which are
         then followed by n/k merges when the block is returned.


         12.6 Storage Compaction
         There are times when, even after merging all adjacent empty blocks, we cannot
         satisfy a request for a new block. It could be, of course, that there simply is not the
         space in the entire heap to provide a block of the desired size. But more typical is a
         situation like Fig. 12.11, where although there are 2200 bytes available, we cannot
         satisfy a request for a block of more than 1000. The problem is that the available
         space is divided among several noncontiguous blocks. There are two general
         approaches to this problem.

               1. Arrange that the available space for a datum can be composed of several
                  empty blocks. If we do so, we may as well require that all blocks are the same
                  size and consist of space for a pointer and space for data. In a used block, the
                  pointer indicates the next block used for the datum and is null in the last
                  block. For example, if we were storing data whose size frequently was small,
                  we might choose blocks of sixteen bytes, with four bytes used for a pointer
                  and twelve for data. If data items were usually long, we might choose blocks
                  of several hundred bytes, again allocating four for a pointer and the balance
                  for data.
               2. When merging adjacent empty blocks fails to provide a sufficiently large
                  block, move the data around in the heap so all full blocks are at the left (low
                  position) end, and there is one large available block at the right.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (26 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




             Method (1), using chains of blocks for a datum, tends to be wasteful of space. If
         we choose a small block size, we use a large fraction of space for "overhead," the
         pointers needed to maintain chains. If we use large blocks, we shall have little
         overhead, but many blocks will be almost wasted, storing a little datum. The only
         situation in which this sort of approach is to be preferred is when the typical data
         item is very large. For example, many file systems work this way, dividing the heap,
         which is typically a disk unit, into equal-sized blocks, of say 512 to 4096 bytes,
         depending on the system. As many files are much longer than these numbers, there is
         not too much wasted space, and pointers to the blocks composing a file take
         relatively little space. Allocation of space under this discipline is relatively
         straightforward, given what has been said in previous sections, and we shall not
         discuss the matter further here.


         The Compaction Problem
         The typical problem we face is to take a collection of blocks in use, as suggested by
         Fig. 12.16(a), each of which may be of a different size and pointed to by more than
         one pointer, and slide them left until all available space is at the right end of the
         heap, as shown in Fig. 12.16(b). The pointers must continue to point to the same data
         as before, naturally.




                                      Fig. 12.16. The storage compaction process.

             There are some simple solutions to this problem if we allocate a little extra space
         in each block, and we shall discuss another, more complicated method that is
         efficient, yet requires no extra space in utilized blocks beyond what is required for
         any of the storage management schemes we have discussed, namely a full/empty bit
         and a count indicating the size of the block.

             A simple scheme for compacting is first to scan all blocks from the left, whether
         full or empty, and compute a "forwarding address" for each full block. The
         forwarding address of a block is its present position minus the sum of all the empty
         space to its left, that is, the position to which the block should be moved eventually.
         It is easy to calculate forwarding addresses. As we scan blocks from the left,
         accumulate the amount of empty space we see and subtract this amount from the
         position of each block we see. The algorithm is sketched in Fig. 12.17.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (27 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         (1) var
               p: integer; { the position of the current block }
               gap: integer; { the total amount of empty space seen so far }
             begin
         (2)    p := left end of heap;
         (4)    gap := 0;
         (5)    while p ≤ right end of heap do begin
                    { let p point to block B }
         (6)         if B is empty then
         (7)            gap := gap + count in block B
                    else { B is full }
         (8)            forwarding address of B := p - gap;
         (9)         p := p + count in block B
                end
             end;

                                  Fig. 12.17. Computation of forwarding addresses.

            Having computed forwarding addresses, we then look at all pointers to the heap.†
         We follow each pointer to some block B and replace the pointer by the forwarding
         address found in block B. Finally, we move all full blocks to their forwarding
         addresses. This process is similar to Fig. 12.17, with line (8) replaced by


               for i := p to p - 1 + count in B do
                 heap[i - gap] := heap[i];

         to move block B left by an amount gap. Note that the movement of full blocks,
         which takes time proportional to the amount of the heap in use, will likely dominate
         the other costs of the compaction.


         Morris' Algorithm
         F. L. Morris discovered a method for compacting a heap without using space in
         blocks for forwarding addresses. It does, however, require an endmarker bit
         associated with each pointer and with each block to indicate the end of a chain of
         pointers. The essential idea is to create a chain of pointers emanating from a fixed
         position in each full block and linking all the pointers to that block. For example, we
         see in Fig. 12.16(a) three pointers, A, D, and E, pointing to the leftmost full block. In
         Fig. 12.18, we see the desired chain of pointers. A chunk of the data of size equal to



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (28 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         that of a pointer has been removed from the block and placed at the end of the chain,
         where pointer A used to be.




                                                Fig. 12.18. Chaining pointers.

            The method for creating such chains of pointers is as follows. We scan all the
         pointers in any convenient order. Suppose we consider a pointer p to block B. If the
         endmarker bit in block B is 0, then p is the first pointer found that points to B. We
         place in p the contents of those positions of B used for the pointer chain, and we
         make these positions of B point to p. Then we set the endmarker bit in B to 1,
         indicating it now has a pointer, and we set the endmarker bit in p to 0, indicating the
         end of the pointer chain and the presence of the displaced data.

            Suppose now that when we first consider pointer p to block B the endmarker bit
         in B is 1. Then B already has the head of a chain of pointers. We copy the pointer in
         B into p, make B point to p, and set the endmarker bit in p to 1. Thus we effectively
         insert p at the head of the chain.

            Once we have all the pointers to each block linked in a chain emanating from that
         block, we can move the full blocks far left as possible, just as in the simpler
         algorithm previously discussed. Lastly, we scan each block in its new position and
         run down its chain of pointers. Each pointer encountered is made to point to the
         block in its new position. When we encounter the end of the chain, we restore the
         data from B, held in the last pointer, to its rightful place in block B and set the
         endmarker bit in the block to 0.


         Exercises

                     Consider the following heap of 1000 bytes, where blank blocks are in use,
            12.1     and the labeled blocks are linked on a free list in alphabetical order. The
                     numbers indicate the first byte in each block.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (29 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




                      Suppose the following requests are made:

                            i. allocate a block of 120 bytes
                           ii. allocate a block of 70 bytes
                          iii. return to the front of the available list the block in bytes 700-
                               849
                          iv. allocate a block of 130 bytes.

                      Give the free list, in order, after executing the above sequence of
                      steps, assuming free blocks are selected by the strategy of

                           a. first fit
                           b. best fit.




                     Consider the following heap in which blank regions are in use and labeled
            12.2
                     regions are empty.




                      Give sequences of requests that can be satisfied if we use

                           a. first fit but not best fit
                           b. best fit but not first fit.




                         Suppose we use an exponential buddy system with sizes 1, 2, 4, 8, and
                         16 on a heap of size 16. If we request a block of size n, for 1 ≤ n ≤ 16,
                         we must allocate a block of size 2i, where 2i-1 < n ≤ 2i. The unused
                         portion of the block, if any, cannot be used to satisfy any other request.
                         If we need a block of size 2i, i < 4, and no such free block exists, then
                         we first find a block of size 2i+1 and split it into two equal parts. If no
                         block of size 2i+1 exists, we first find and split a free block of size 2i+2,
                         and so on. If we find ourselves looking for a free block of size 32, we
                         fail and cannot satisfy the request. For the purposes of this question, we
                         never combine adjacent free blocks in the heap.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (30 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




               12.3          There are sequences of requests a1, a2, . . . , an whose sum is less
                         than 16, such that the last request cannot be satisfied. For example,
                         consider the sequence 5, 5, 5. The first request causes the initial block
                         of size 16 to be split into two blocks of size 8 and one of them is used to
                         satisfy the request. The remaining free block of size 8 satisfies the
                         second request, and there is no free space to satisfy the third request.

                             Find a sequence a1, a2, . . . , an of (not necessarily identical) integers
                         between 1 and 16, whose sum is as small as possible, such that, treated
                         as a sequence of requests for blocks of size a1, a2, . . . , an, the last
                         request cannot be satisfied. Explain why your sequence of requests
                         cannot be satisfied, but any sequence whose sum is smaller can be
                         satisfied.

                         Consider compacting memory while managing equal-sized blocks.
                         Assume each block consists of a data field and a pointer field, and that
                         we have marked every block currently in use. The blocks are currently
                         located between memory locations a and b. We wish to relocate all
               12.4
                         active blocks so that they occupy contiguous memory starting at a. In
                         relocating a block remember that the pointer field of any block pointing
                         to the relocated block must be updated. Design an algorithm for
                         compacting the blocks.

                         Consider an array of size n. Design an algorithm to shift all items in the
                         array k places cyclically counterclockwise with only constant additional
               12.5      memory independent of k and n. Hint. Consider what happens if we
                         reverse the first k elements, the last n-k elements, and then finally the
                         entire array.

                         Design an algorithm to replace a substring y of a string xyz by another
               12.6      substring y' using as little additional memory as possible. What is the
                         time and space complexity of your algorithm?

                         Write a program to make a copy of a given list. What is the time and
               12.7
                         space complexity of your program?

                         Write a program to determine whether two lists are identical. What is
               12.8
                         the time and space complexity of your program?

               12.9      Implement Morris' heap compaction algorithm of Section 12.6.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (31 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




                         Design a storage allocation scheme for a situation in which memory is
            *12.10       allocated and freed in blocks of lengths one and two. Give bounds on
                         how well your algorithm works.


         Bibliographic Notes
         Efficient storage management is a central concern in many programming languages,
         including Snobol [Farber, Griswold, and Polonsky (1964)], Lisp [McCarthy (1965)],
         APL [Iverson (1962)], and SETL [Schwartz (1973)]. Nicholls [1975] and Pratt
         [1975] discuss storage management techniques in the context of programming
         language compilation.

            The buddy system of storage allocation was first published by Knowlton [1965].
         Fibonacci buddy systems were studied by Hirschberg [1973].

            The elegant marking algorithm for use in garbage collection was discovered by
         Peter Deutsch (Deutsch and Bobrow [1966]) and by Schorr and Waite [1967]. The
         heap compaction scheme in Section 12.6 is from Morris [1978].

            Robson [1971] and Robson [1974] analyzes the amount of memory needed for
         dynamic storage allocation algorithms. Robson [1977] presents a bounded
         workspace algorithm for copying cyclic structures. Fletcher and Silver [1966]
         contains another solution to Exercise 12.5 that uses little additional memory.

         † Each programming language must provide for itself a method of representing the
         current set of variables, and any of the methods discussed in Chapters 4 and 5 is
         appropriate. For example, most implementations use a hash table to hold the
         variables.

         † This awkwardness is made necessary by peculiarities of Pascal.

         † Note that in Fig. 12.1, instead of a count indicating the length of the block, we used
         the length of the data.

         † The reader should, as an exercise, discover how to maintain the pointers when a
         block is split into two; presumably one piece is used for a new data item, and the
         other remains empty.

         † If c - d is so small that a count and pointer cannot fit, we must use the whole block
         and delete it from the available list.


http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (32 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
Data Structures and Algorithms: CHAPTER 12: Memory Management




         † Actually, there is a minimum block size larger than 1, since blocks must hold a
         pointer, a count and a full/empty bit if they are to be chained to an available list.

         † Since empty blocks must hold pointers (and, as we shall see, other information as
         well) we do not really start the sequence of permitted sizes at 1, but rather at some
         suitably larger number in the sequence, say 8 bytes.

         † Of course, if there are no empty blocks of size si+1, we create one by splitting a
         block of size si+2, and so on. If no blocks of any larger size exist, we are effectively
         out of space and must reorganize the heap as in the next section.

         ‡ Incidentally, it is convenient to think of the blocks of sizes si and si - k making up a
         block of size si + 1 as "buddies," from whence comes the term "buddy system."

         † As in the previous section, we must assume that one bit of each block is reserved to
         tell whether the block is in use or empty.

         † In all that follows we assume the collection of such pointers is available. For
         example, a typical Snobol implementation stores pairs consisting of a variable name
         and a pointer to the value for that name in a hash table, with the hash function
         computed from the name. Scanning the whole hash table allows us to visit all
         pointers.

                                                        Table of Contents




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1212.htm (33 of 33) [1.7.2001 19:32:20]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_1.gif [1.7.2001 19:32:23]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_3.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_3.gif [1.7.2001 19:32:35]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_4.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_4.gif [1.7.2001 19:32:50]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_5.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_5.gif [1.7.2001 19:32:56]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_6.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_6.gif [1.7.2001 19:33:02]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_7.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_7.gif [1.7.2001 19:33:13]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_8.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_8.gif [1.7.2001 19:33:17]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_9.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_9.gif [1.7.2001 19:33:23]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_10.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_10.gif [1.7.2001 19:33:32]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_11.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_11.gif [1.7.2001 19:33:43]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_12.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f11_12.gif [1.7.2001 19:33:53]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          Bibliography
          Adel'son-Velskii, G. M., and Y. M. Landis [1962]. "An algorithm for the
          organization of information," Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 146, pp. 263-266 English
          translation in Soviet Math. Dokl. 3, pp. 1259-1262.

          Aho, A. V., M. R. Garey, and J. D. Ullman [1972]. "The transitive reduction of a
          directed graph," SIAM J. Computing 1:2, pp. 131-137.

          Aho, A. V., J. E. Hopcroft, and J. D. Ullman [1974]. The Design and Analysis of
          Computer Algorithms," Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Aho, A. V., and N. J. A. Sloane [1973]. "Some doubly exponential sequences,"
          Fibonnaci Quarterly 11:4, pp. 429-437.

          Aho, A. V., and J. D. Ullman [1977]. Principles of Compiler Design, Addison-
          Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Bayer, R., and E. M. McCreight [1972]. "Organization and maintenance of large
          ordered indices," Acta Informatica 1:3, pp. 173-189.

          Bellman, R. E. [1957]. Dynamic Programming, Princeton University Press,
          Princeton, N. J.

          Bentley, J. L. [1982]. Writing Efficient Programs, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
          N. J.

          Bentley, J. L., D. Haken, and J. B. Saxe [1978]. "A general method for solving
          divide-and-conquer recurrences," CMU-CS-78-154, Dept. of CS, Carnegie-Mellon
          Univ., Pittsburg, Pa.

          Berge, C. [1957]. "Two theorems in graph theory," Proc. National Academy of
          Sciences 43, pp. 842-844.

          Berge, C. [1958]. The Theory of Graphs and its Applications, Wiley, N. Y.

          Birtwistle, G. M., O.-J. Dahl, B. Myhrhaug, and K. Nygaard [1973]. SIMULA Begin,
          Auerbach Press, Philadelphia, Pa.

          Blum, M., R. W. Floyd, V. R. Pratt, R. L. Rivest, and R. E. Tarjan [1972]. "Time



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (1 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          bounds for selection," J. Computer and System Sciences 7:4, pp. 448- 461.

          Boruvka, O. [1926]. "On a minimal problem," Práce Moraské Pridovedecké
          Spolecnosti 3:3, pp. 37-58.

          Brooks, F. P. [1974]. The Mythical Man Month, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Carter, J. L., and M. N. Wegman [1977]. "Universal classes of hash functions," Proc.
          Ninth Annual ACM Syrup. on Theory of Computing, pp. 106-112.

          Cheriton, D., and R. E. Tarjan [1976]. "Finding minimum spanning trees," SIAM J.
          Computing 5:4, pp. 724-742.

          Cocke, J., and F. E. Allen [1976]. "A program data flow analysis procedure," Comm.
          ACM 19:3, pp. 137-147.

          Coffman, E. G. (ed.) [1976]. Computer and Job Shop Scheduling Theory, John Wiley
          and Sons, New York.

          Comer, D. [1979]. "The ubiquitous B-tree," Computing Surveys 11, pp. 121-137.

          Cooley, J. M., and J. W. Tukey [1965]. "An algorithm for the machine calculation of
          complex Fourier series," Math. Comp. 19, pp. 297-301.

          DBTG [1971]. CODASYL Data Base Task Group April 1971 Report, ACM, New
          York.

          Demers, A., and J. Donahue [1979]. "Revised report on RUSSELL," TR 79-389,
          Dept. of Computer Science, Cornell Univ., Ithaca, N. Y.

          Deo, N. [1975]. Graph Theory with Applications to Engineering and Computer
          Science, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N. J.

          Deutsch, L. P., and D. G. Bobrow [1966]. "An efficient incremental automatic
          garbage collector," Comm. ACM 9:9, pp. 522-526.

          Dijkstra, E. W. [1959]. "A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,"
          Numerische Mathematik 1, pp. 269-271.

          Edmonds, J. [1965]. "Paths, trees, and flowers," Canadian J. Math 17, pp. 449-467.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (2 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          Even, S. [1980]. Graph Algorithms, Computer Science Press, Rockville, Md.

          Even, S., and O. Kariv [1975]. "An 0(n2.5) algorithm for maximum matching in
          general graphs," Proc. IEEE Sixteenth Annual Symp. on Foundations of Computer
          Science, pp. 100-112.

          Farber, D., R. E. Griswold, and I. Polonsky [1964]. "SNOBOL, a string manipulation
          language," J. ACM 11:1, pp. 21-30.

          Fischer, M. J. [1972]. "Efficiency of equivalence algorithms," in Complexity of
          Computer Computations (R. E. Miller and J. W. Thatcher, eds.) pp. 153-168.

          Fletcher, W., and R. Silver [1966]. "Algorithm 284: interchange of two blocks of
          data," Comm. ACM 9:5, p. 326.

          Floyd, R. W. [1962]. "Algorithm 97: shortest path," Comm. ACM 5:6, p. 345.

          Floyd, R. W. [1964]. "Algorithm 245: treesort 3," Comm. ACM 7:12, p. 701.

          Floyd, R. W., and A. Smith [1973]. "A linear time two-tape merge," Inf. Processing
          letters 2:5, pp. 123-126.

          Ford, L. R., and S. M. Johnson [1959]. "A tournament problem," Amer. Math.
          Monthly 66, pp. 387-389.

          Frazer, W. D., and A. C. McKellar [1970]. "Samplesort: a sampling approach to
          minimal tree storage sorting," J. ACM 17:3, pp. 496-507.

          Fredkin, E. [1960]. "Trie memory," Comm. ACM 3:9, pp. 490-499.

          Friend, E. H. [1956]. "Sorting on electronic computer systems," J. ACM 3:2, pp. 134-
          168.

          Fuchs, H., Z. M. Kedem, and S. P. Uselton [1977]. "Optimal surface reconstruction
          using planar contours," Comm. ACM 20:10, pp. 693-702.

          Garey, M. R., and D. S. Johnson [1979]. Computers and Intractability: a Guide to
          the Theory of NP-Completeness, Freeman, San Francisco.

          Geschke, C. M., J. H. Morris, Jr., and E. H. Satterthwaite [1977]. "Early expreience
          with MESA," Comm. ACM 20:8, pp. 540-552.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (3 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          Gotlieb, C. C., and L. R. Gotlieb [1978]. Data Types and Data Structures, Prentice-
          Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N. J.

          Greene, D. H., and D. E. Knuth [1983]. Mathematics for the Analysis of Algorithms,
          Birkhauser, Boston, Mass.

          Gudes, E., and S. Tsur [1980]. "Experiments with B-tree reorganization," ACM
          SIGMOD Symposium on Management of Data, pp. 200-206.

          Hall, M. [1948]. "Distinct representatives of subsets," Bull. AMS 54, pp. 922-926.

          Harary, F. [1969]. Graph Theory, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Hirschberg, D. S. [1973]. "A class of dynamic memory allocation algorithms,"
          Comm. ACM 16:10, pp. 615-618.

          Hoare, C. A. R. [1962]. "Quicksort," Computer J. 5:1, pp. 10-15.

          Hoare, C. A. R., O.-J. Dahl, and E. W. Dijkstra [1972]. Structured Programming,
          Academic Press, N. Y.

          Hopcroft, J. E., and R. M. Karp [1973]. "An n5/2 algorithm for maximum matchings
          in bipartite graphs," SIAM J. Computing 2:4, pp. 225-231.

          Hopcroft, J. E., and R. E. Tarjan [1973]. "Efficient algorithms for graph
          manipulation," Comm. ACM 16:6, pp. 372-378.

          Hopcroft, J. E., and J. D. Ullman [1973]. "Set merging algorithms," SIAM J.
          Computing 2:4, pp. 294-303.

          Huffman, D. A. [1952]. "A method for the construction of minimum-redundancy
          codes," Proc. IRE 40, pp. 1098-1101.

          Hunt, J. W., and T. G. Szymanski [1977]. "A fast algorithm for computing longest
          common subsequences," Comm. ACM 20:5, pp. 350-353.

          Iverson, K. [1962]. A Programming Language, John Wiley and Sons, New York.

          Johnson, D. B. [1975]. "Priority queues with update and finding minimum spanning
          trees," Inf. Processing Letters 4:3, pp. 53-57.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (4 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          Johnson, D. B. [1977]. "Efficient algorithms for shortest paths is sparse networks," J.
          ACM 24:1, pp. 1-13.

          Karatsuba, A., and Y. Ofman [1962]. "Multiplication of multidigit numbers on
          automata," Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 145, pp. 293-294.

          Kernighan, B. W., and P. J. Plauger [1974]. The Elements of Programming Style,
          McGraw-Hill, N. Y.

          Kernighan, B. W., and P. J. Plauger [1981]. Software Tools in Pascal, Addison-
          Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Knowlton, K. C. [1965]. "A fast storage allocator," Comm. ACM 8:10, pp. 623-625.

          Knuth, D. E. [1968]. The Art of Computer Programming Vol. I: Fundamental
          Algorithms, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Knuth, D. E. [1971]. "Optimum binary search trees," Acta Informatica 1:1, pp. 14-
          25.

          Knuth, D. E. [1973]. The Art of Computer Programming Vol. III: Sorting and
          Searching, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Knuth, D. E. [1981]. TEX and Metafont, New Directions in Typesetting, Digital
          Press, Bedford, Mass.

          Kruskal, J. B. Jr. [1956]. "On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the
          traveling salesman problem," Proc. AMS 7:1, pp. 48-50.

          Lin, S., and B. W. Kernighan [1973]. "A heuristic algorithm for the traveling
          salesman problem," Operations Research 21, pp. 498-516.

          Liskov, B., A. Snyder, R. Atkinson, and C. Scaffert [1977]. "Abstraction
          mechanisms in CLU," Comm. ACM 20:8, pp. 564-576.

          Liu, C. L. [1968]. Introduction to Combinatorial Mathematics, McGraw-Hill, N. Y.

          Lueker, G. S. [1980]. "Some techniques for solving recurrences," Computing
          Surveys, 12:4, pp. 419-436.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (5 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          Lum, V., and H. Ling [1970]. "Multi-attribute retrieval with combined indices,"
          Comm. ACM 13:11, pp. 660-665.

          Maurer, W. D., and T. G. Lewis [1975]. "Hash table methods," Computing Surveys
          7:1, pp. 5-20.

          McCarthy, J. et al. [1965]. LISP 1.5 Programmers Manual, MIT Press, Cambridge,
          Mass.

          Micali, S., and V. V. Vazirani [1980]. "An           algorithm for finding
          maximum matching in general graphs," Proc. IEEE Twenty-first Annual Symp. on
          Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 17-27.

          Moenck, R., and A. B. Borodin [1972]. "Fast modular transforms via division," Proc.
          IEEE Thirteenth Annual Symp. on Switching and Automata Theory, pp. 90-96.

          Morris, F. L. [1978]. "A time- and space-efficient garbage compaction algorithm,"
          Comm. ACM 21:8, pp. 662-665.

          Morris, R. [1968]. "Scatter storage techniques," Comm. ACM 11:1, pp. 35-44.

          Moyles, D. M., and G. L. Thompson [1969]. "Finding a minimum equivalent graph
          of a digraph," J. ACM 16:3, pp. 455-460.

          Nicholls, J. E. [1975]. The Structure and Design of Programming Languages,
          Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Nievergelt, J. [1974]. "Binary search trees and file organization," Computer Surveys
          6:3, pp. 195-207.

          Papadimitriou, C. H., and K. Steiglitz [1982]. Combinatorial Optimization:
          Algorithms and Complexity, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N. J.

          Parker, D. S. Jr. [1980]. "Conditions for optimality of the Huffman algorithm," SIAM
          J. Computing 9:3, pp. 470-489.

          Perl, Y., A. Itai, and H. Avni [1978]. "Interpolation search -- a log log n search,"
          Comm. ACM 21:7, pp. 550-553.

          Peterson, W. W. [1957]. "Addressing for random access storage," IBM J. Res. and
          Devel. 1:2, pp. 130-146.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (6 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          Pratt, T. W. [1975]. Programming Languages: Design and Implementation, Prentice-
          Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N. J.

          Pratt, V. R. [1979]. Shellsort and Sorting Networks, Garland, New York.

          Prim, R. C. [1957]. "Shortest connection networks and some generalizations," Bell
          System Technical J. 36, pp. 1389-1401.

          Reingold, E. M. [1972]. "On the optimality of some set algorithms," J. ACM 19:4,
          pp. 649-659.

          Robson, J. M. [1971]. "An estimate of the store size necessary for dynamic storage
          allocation," J. ACM 18:3, pp. 416-423.

          Robson, J. M. [1974]. "Bounds for some functions concerning dynamic storage
          allocation," J. ACM 21:3, pp. 491-499.

          Robson, J. M. [1977]. "A bounded storage algorithm for copying cyclic structures,"
          Comm. ACM 20:6, pp. 431-433.

          Sahni, S. [1974]. "Computationally related problems," SIAM J. Computing 3:3, pp.
          262-279.

          Sammet, J. E. [1968]. Programming Languages: History and Fundamentals,
          Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N. J.

          Schkolnick, M. [1975]. "The optimal selection of secondary indices for files,"
          Information Systems 1, pp. 141-146.

          Schoenhage, A., and V. Strassen [1971]. "Schnelle multiplikation grosser zahlen,"
          Computing 7, pp. 281-292.

          Schorr, H., and W. M. Waite [1967]. "An efficient machine-independent procedure
          for garbage collection in various list structures," Comm. ACM 10:8, pp. 501-506.

          Schwartz, J. T. [1973]. On Programming: An Interrum Report on the SETL Project,
          Courant Inst., New York.

          Sharir, M. [1981]. "A strong-connectivity algorithm and its application in data flow
          analysis," Computers and Mathematics with Applications 7:1, pp. 67-72.



http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (7 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          Shaw, M., W. A. Wulf, and R. L. London [1977]. "Abstraction and verification in
          ALPHARD: defining and specifying iteration and generators," Comm. ACM 20:8,
          pp. 553-563.

          Shell, D. L. [1959]. "A high-speed sorting procedure," Comm. ACM 2:7, pp. 30-32.

          Shell, D. L. [1971]. "Optimizing the polyphase sort," Comm. ACM 14:11, pp. 713-
          719.

          Singleton, R. C. [1969]. "Algorithm 347: an algorithm for sorting with minimal
          storage," Comm. ACM 12:3, pp. 185-187.

          Strassen, V. [1969]. "Gaussian elimination is not optimal," Numerische Mathematik
          13, pp. 354-356.

          Stroustrup, B. [1982]. "Classes: an abstract data type facility for the C language,"
          SIGPLAN Notices 17:1, pp. 354-356.

          Suzuki, N. [1982]. "Analysis of pointer 'rotation'," Comm. ACM 25:5, pp. 330-335.

          Tarjan, R. E. [1972]. "Depth first search and linear graph algorithms," SIAM J.
          Computing 1:2, pp. 146-160.

          Tarjan, R. E. [1975]. "On the efficiency of a good but not linear set merging
          algorithm," J. ACM 22:2, pp. 215-225.

          Tarjan, R. E. [1981]. "Minimum spanning trees," unpublished memorandum, Bell
          Laboratories, Murray Hill, N. J.

          Tarjan, R. E. [1983]. Data Structures and Graph Algorithms, unpublished
          manuscript, Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, N. J.

          Ullman, J. D. [1974]. "Fast algorithms for the elimination of common
          subexpressions," Acta Informatica 2:3, pp. 191-213.

          Ullman, J. D. [1982]. Principles of Database Systems, Computer Science Press,
          Rockville, Md.

          van Emde Boas, P., R. Kaas, and E. Zijlstra [1977]. "Design and implementation of
          an efficient priority queue structure," Math Syst. Theory, 10, pp. 99-127.




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (8 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
Data Structures and Algorithms: Bibliography




          Warshall, S. [1962]. "A theorem on Boolean matrices," J. ACM 9:1, pp. 11-12.

          Weinberg, G. M. [1971]. The Psychology of Computer Programming, Van Nostrand,
          N. Y.

          Weiner, P. [1973]. "Linear pattern matching algorithms," Proc. IEEE Fourteenth
          Annual Symp. on Switching and Automata Theory, pp. 1-11.

          Wexelblat, R. L. (ed.) [1981]. History of Programming Languages, Academic Press,
          N. Y.

          Wiederhold, G. [1982]. Database Design, McGraw-Hill, New York.

          Williams, J. W. J. [1964]. "Algorithm 232: Heapsort," Comm. ACM 7:6, pp. 347-
          348.

          Wirth, N. [1973]. Systematic Programming: An Introduction, Prentice-Hall,
          Englewood Cliffs, N. J.

          Wirth, N. [1976]. Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs, Prentice-Hall,
          Englewood Cliffs, N. J.

          Wulf, W. A., M. Shaw, P. Hilfinger, and L. Flon [1981]. Fundamental Structures of
          Computer Science, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.

          Yao, A. C. [1975]. "An O(|E| log log |V|) algorithm for finding minimum spanning
          trees," Inf. Processing Letters 4:1, pp. 21-23.

          Yao, A. C., and F. F. Yao [1976]. "The complexity of searching a random ordered
          table," Proc. IEEE Seventeenth Annual Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science,
          pp. 173-177.

          Yourdon, E., and L. L. Constantine [1975]. Structured Design, Yourdon, New York.

                                                         Table of Contents




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/mf1213.htm (9 of 9) [1.7.2001 19:33:58]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_1.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_1.gif [1.7.2001 19:34:07]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_2.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_2.gif [1.7.2001 19:34:15]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_3.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_3.gif [1.7.2001 19:34:23]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_6.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_6.gif [1.7.2001 19:34:40]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_7.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_7.gif [1.7.2001 19:34:55]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_10.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_10.gif [1.7.2001 19:35:10]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_11.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_11.gif [1.7.2001 19:35:22]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_12.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_12.gif [1.7.2001 19:35:30]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_14.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_14.gif [1.7.2001 19:35:42]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_15.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_15.gif [1.7.2001 19:35:51]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_16.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_16.gif [1.7.2001 19:36:07]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_18.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_18.gif [1.7.2001 19:36:17]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_19.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_19.gif [1.7.2001 19:36:20]
http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_20.gif




http://www.ourstillwaters.org/stillwaters/csteaching/DataStructuresAndAlgorithms/images/f12_20.gif [1.7.2001 19:36:24]
